Also in the 5 Steps series:
5 Steps to a 5: AP Macroeconomics 2021
5 Steps to a 5: AP Macroeconomics 2021 Elite Student Edition
5 Steps to a 5: AP Microeconomics 2021
5 Steps to a 5: AP Microeconomics 2021 Elite Student Edition
5 Steps to a 5: AP Microeconomics/Macroeconomics Flashcards
Also in the 500 AP Questions to Know by Test Day series:
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Biology Questions to Know by Test Day, Third
Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Calculus AB/BC Questions to Know by Test
Day, Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Chemistry Questions to Know by Test Day,
Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP English Language Questions to Know by Test
Day, Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP English Literature Questions to Know by Test
Day, Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Environmental Science Questions to Know by
Test Day, Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP European History Questions to Know by Test
Day, Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Human Geography to Know by Test Day, Third
Edition

5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Macroeconomics Questions to Know by Test
Day, Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Physics 1 Questions to Know by Test Day, Third
Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Physics C Questions to Know by Test Day
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Psychology Questions to Know by Test Day,
Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Statistics Questions to Know by Test Day, Third
Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP U.S. Government & Politics Questions to Know
by Test Day, Second Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP U.S. History Questions to Know by Test Day,
Third Edition
5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP World History Questions to Know by Test Day,
Third Edition

Anaxos, Inc. (Austin, TX) has been creating education and reference
materials for over fifteen years. Based in Austin, Texas, the company uses
writers from across the globe who offer expertise on an array of subjects
just as expansive.
Brian Reddington earned his bachelor’s degree in history from Stony
Brook University in Stony Brook, New York, before pursuing a master’s
degree in special education at Queens College in New York City. A
dedicated educator, he has been teaching economics since 2008. He lives in
Bellmore, New York, with his wife and two young daughters, Anna June
and Sarah Gretchen.
Copyright © 2021, 2017, 2012 by McGraw Hill. All rights reserved.
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part
of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any
means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written
permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-26-047470-1
MHID:
1-26-047470-4
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title:
ISBN: 978-1-26-047469-5, MHID: 1-26-047469-0.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than
put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we
use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark
owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such
designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity
discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate

training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us
page at www.mhprofessional.com.
McGraw Hill, the McGraw Hill logo, 5 Steps to a 5, and related trade
dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of McGraw Hill and/or its
affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used
without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their
respective owners. McGraw Hill is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book.
AP, Advanced Placement Program, and College Board are registered
trademarks of the College Board, which was not involved in the production
of, and does not endorse, this product.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its
licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to
these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the
right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile,
disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works
based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the
work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You
may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other
use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL
EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR
WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING
THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE
ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR
OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR

A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do
not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet
your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free.
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or
anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in
the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education
has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through
the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its
licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive,
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to
use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of
such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause
whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

CONTENTS
Introduction
Diagnostic Quiz
Questions 1–20

Chapter 1 Basic Economic Concepts
Questions 21–84

Chapter 2 Supply and Demand
Questions 85–187

Chapter 3 Production, Cost, and the
Perfect Competition Model
Question 188–276

Chapter 4 Imperfect Competition
Question 277–354

Chapter 5 Factor Markets
Questions 355–439

Chapter 6 Market Failure and the Role of
Government
Questions 440–500
Answers

INTRODUCTION
Congratulations! You’ve taken a big step toward AP success by
purchasing 5 Steps to a 5: 500 AP Microeconomics Questions to Know by
Test Day. We are here to help you take the next step and score high on your
AP exam so you can earn college credits and get into the college or
university of your choice. This book gives you 500 AP-style multiplechoice questions that cover all the most essential course material. Each
question has a detailed answer explanation. These questions will give you
valuable independent practice to supplement your regular textbook and the
groundwork you are already doing in your AP classroom. This and the other
books in this series were written by expert AP teachers who know your
exam inside out and can identify the crucial exam information as well as
questions that are most likely to appear on the exam.
You might be the kind of student who takes several AP courses and
needs to study extra questions a few weeks before the exam for a final
review. Or you might be the kind of student who puts off preparing until the
last weeks before the exam. No matter what your preparation style is, you
will surely benefit from reviewing these 500 questions, which closely
parallel the content, format, and degree of difficulty of the questions on the
actual AP exam. These questions and their answer explanations are the
ideal last-minute study tool for those final few weeks before the test.
Remember the old saying “Practice makes perfect.” If you practice
with all the questions and answers in this book, we are certain you will
build the skills and confidence you need to do great on the exam. Good
luck!
—Editors of McGraw-Hill Education

Diagnostic Quiz

GETTING STARTED: THE DIAGNOSTIC
QUIZ
The following questions refer to different units in this book. These
questions will help you test your understanding of the concepts tested on
the AP exam by giving you an idea of where you need to focus your
attention as you prepare. For each question, simply circle the letter of your
choice. Once you are done with the exam, check your work against the
given answers, which also indicate where you can find the corresponding
material in the book.
Good luck!

DIAGNOSTIC QUIZ QUESTIONS
1. The opportunity cost in hours that it takes China and
Switzerland to produce mobile phones and clocks is shown in the
following table. According to the theory of comparative advantage,
which of the following is accurate?

(A) China should impose a tariff on Switzerland in order to
make its production of clocks less effective.
(B) China should produce cars and clocks because it is more
effective in producing both, while Switzerland should produce
something else, and the two countries should trade.
(C) China should produce cars, while Switzerland should
produce clocks; these countries should then establish trade
relations.
(D) China should produce clocks, while Switzerland should
produce cars because these are the areas where they have the
higher opportunity costs; they should then establish trade relations.
(E) The opportunity cost for clocks is 12 hours, while the
opportunity cost for producing clocks is 5 hours because this is the
difference between the two opportunity costs.
2. James is a student who works several part-time jobs. He helps
out at a local restaurant, for which he is paid $14 per hour. He also

sometimes works at a library where he helps sort books, for which he
is paid $18 per hour. James decided that he needs to stop working and
study for an additional hour for a difficult history exam. What is the
opportunity cost of James studying history?
(A) The opportunity cost is $32 per hour because that is the
total value of the two jobs James could have done.
(B) The opportunity cost is $4 per hour because James is
doing an activity that is worth less than the most profitable
opportunity.
(C) The opportunity cost is $14 per hour because this is the
minimal amount of income that James could have earned.
(D) There is no opportunity cost because focusing on
education is an intangible good that will benefit James.
(E) The opportunity cost is $18 because this is the most
profitable business activity that James could have selected.
3. The United Kingdom is trying to give its domestic producers of
wheat an opportunity to increase production. The main problem on the
market is the excess amount of Chinese wheat which prevents
domestic producers from making money. Which of the following
would be an example of implementing a quota on Chinese wheat?
(A) if the United Kingdom prohibited any Chinese wheat
from entering the U.K. market
(B) if the United Kingdom placed a tax on Chinese wheat
which made it 15 percent more expensive
(C) if the United Kingdom decided that all Chinese wheat
needed to pass an additional health inspection

(D) if the United Kingdom decided that only 10,000 tons of
wheat could be imported every year
(E) if the United Kingdom ordered that every Chinese
producer had to pay an administrative fee of 10 pounds
4. Which of the following is shown on the diagram if supply
shifts from point A to point B?

(A) a contraction of supply
(B) an expansion of supply
(C) a shift in the supply curve to the left
(D) a shift in the supply curve to the right
(E) the deadweight cost of supply
5. What type of elasticity is shown in the following diagram?

(A) unit demand elasticity
(B) perfectly elastic demand
(C) relatively elastic demand
(D) relatively inelastic demand
(E) perfectly inelastic demand
6. The following table shows the number of cars that a factory in
Michigan can produce with up to five workers. Which worker is
responsible for the largest marginal return?

(A) the first worker
(B) the second worker
(C) the third worker
(D) the fourth worker
(E) the fifth worker
7. Which of the following is NOT considered by accounting
profit?
(A) transportation costs
(B) cost of wages
(C) marketing costs
(D) cost of overhead
(E) cost of financial capital
8. The following table shows how much a plane manufacturer can
produce from opening additional plants. If opening a plant costs
$1,000,000 and the company earns $100,000 for every plane sold, how

much will the company earn if it wants to avoid the law of diminishing
returns?

(A) $100,000
(B) $200,000
(C) $350,000
(D) $400,000
(E) $500,000
9. Company A operates in a market that has many small
companies, none of which can impact the market price. The market is
characterized by consumers who learn most of their information from
advertisements and are not fully informed about the products. The
market can be considered effective, and no companies earn economic
profit in the long term. Why is this NOT an example of a perfectly
competitive market?
(A) because perfectly competitive markets do not have a
higher number of small companies
(B) because consumers should be rational and have all of the
relevant information in a perfectly competitive market

(C) because all companies have the ability to impact the price
by changing their output, meaning that companies are not price
takers in a perfectly competitive market
(D) because all companies make more than an economic
profit in a perfectly competitive environment; otherwise, they
would go out of business
(E) because perfectly competitive markets are not considered
effective, as economies of scale are not possible
10. A new study found that Florida loses roughly $50,000,000 a
year because of alcohol addiction. The three domestic companies who
are the largest producers of alcohol earn roughly $200,000,000 every
year and produce 10,000,000 bottles of alcoholic drinks combined.
Which of the following would be the best option to make the social
benefit of alcohol equal to the economic cost of alcohol?
(A) if lawmakers decided that the companies should pay
$200,000,000 every year
(B) if lawmakers decided that the companies should pay a tax
of $5 for every bottle produced
(C) if lawmakers decided that the companies should pay a tax
of $20 for every bottle produced
(D) if lawmakers decided that the companies should pay a tax
of $50 for every bottle produced
(E) if lawmakers decided that the companies should pay a tax
of $40 for every bottle produced
11. In one case of game theory, an individual selects strategy A,
while another individual selects strategy B. After hearing the
alternative option, both individuals have no incentive to change their
selected strategy. What best describes this concept?

(A) negative externality
(B) positive externality
(C) elasticity of demand
(D) marginal return
(E) Nash equilibrium
12. How are a monopoly and a competitive market similar?
(A) Companies can only make a profit in the inelastic end of
the demand curve in both of these market structures.
(B) The quantity provided by companies is at a level where
price equals marginal costs in both market structures.
(C) Both of these market structures have highly limited
barriers to entry.
(D) Both of these market structures are defined by perfect
price discrimination.
(E) These are the only market structures where the law of
diminishing returns can be applied.
13. The following table lists the quantity of cars presented and the
price of cars in five different market types. Which of the following
would MOST likely be the price and quantity if the market were a
monopoly?

(A) It would be market A because monopolists tend to
produce a large quality and sell at high prices.
(B) It would be market B because this is a price where the
market is in equilibrium.
(C) It would be market C because here the monopolist would
have lower marginal revenue than costs.
(D) It would be market D because monopolists tend to be
associated with lower quantities of products and high prices.
(E) It would be market E because it is the lowest price;
monopolists can afford to sell at such a price, as they do not have
marketing costs.
14. In country A, there is only one company that produces
electricity because no other companies are interested and the company
has a contract with the government. In country B, a company filed a
patent for a lifesaving medicine. How can these market structures be
compared?
(A) The situation described in A is an example of
monopolistic structure, while the structure in country B is an
example of an oligopoly.
(B) Both are examples of a natural monopoly.

(C) Both are examples of the use of antitrust policies.
(D) The situation described in A is an example of a perfect
competition, while the structure in country B is an example of a
monopoly.
(E) The situation described in A is an example of a
monopsony, while the structure in country B is an example of a
monopoly.
15. Which of the following is accurate concerning market
equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market?
(A) Companies are price setters.
(B) The level of output produced for price maximization is
when marginal costs are larger than marginal revenue.
(C) The level of output for price maximization is where
marginal revenue equals marginal costs.
(D) The price is equal to marginal revenue in an effective
market.
(E) Companies have significant barriers to entry.
16. Why are subsidies NOT always economically effective?
(A) because it raises the price of the product, which decreases
economic output
(B) because they decrease the quantity of the product, which
shifts the equilibrium of the product
(C) because this is something taxpayers have to pay, so
despite the lower cost of the product, there can be a net loss in
societal welfare

(D) because it will decrease the supply of the product, and it
will also shift the demand curve to the left
(E) because it will lead to an increase in the price when the
demand curve shifts to the right
17. A local road is in a horrible condition despite the fact that it is
frequently used. The road was financed through local contributions,
but many individuals registered their address in another town in order
to avoid paying for the management and maintenance of the road.
Which of the following concepts does this best reflect?
(A) the law of diminishing returns
(B) collective bargaining
(C) free rider
(D) the law of supply and demand
(E) scarcity
18. The Gini coefficient for Belgium is 0.259. Which of the
following is the best representation of that value?
(A) It means that government finances are stable because the
budget deficit is only 2.59 percent.
(B) It means that the unemployment rate is very high because
the value of the Gini coefficient is close to 0.
(C) It means that the inflation rate is very low because the
value of the Gini coefficient is smaller than 1.
(D) It means that income inequality is not such an extreme
problem in Belgium, because the value is much closer to 0 than to
1.

(E) It means that income equality is an extreme problem in
Belgium because the value is very close to 0.
19. Tina is a teacher with a PhD at a private university. When her
students learn from her and then pass that knowledge along to the rest
of their social circle, what is this an example of ?
(A) free-rider problem
(B) collective bargaining
(C) negative externality
(D) positive externality
(E) marginal return
20. The amount of taxes Jane has had to pay in the past five years
is shown in the following table, along with her annual revenue.
Assume that Jane had the same costs every year. This demonstrates a

(A) progressive tax system
(B) regressive tax system
(C) flat tax system
(D) demand tax system

(E) supply tax system

DIAGNOSTIC QUIZ ANSWERS
1. (Unit: Basic Economic Concepts. See Chapter 1 for similar
questions.)
ANSWER: (C) The concept of comparative advantages suggests that
the country that has the lower opportunity cost should produce the good that
it can produce with a lower opportunity cost, and the countries should then
trade to maximize efficiency.
2. (Unit: Basic Economic Concepts. See Chapter 1 for similar
questions.)
ANSWER: (E) The opportunity cost is the cost of a lost opportunity.
As James can earn $18 per hour working at the library, this is the largest
value he has missed out on.
3. (Unit: Basic Economic Concepts. See Chapter 1 for similar
questions.)
ANSWER: (D) A quota is a quantitative restriction of the product,
while the remaining answer choices include outlawing the product, tariffs,
and administrative restrictions.
4. (Unit: Supply and Demand. See Chapter 2 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (A) Downward movement from point A to point B
indicates a lower supply with a lower quantity and price. This means that
supply has contracted.
5. (Unit: Supply and Demand. See Chapter 2 for similar questions.)

ANSWER: (B) Perfectly elastic demand, which is only a theoretical
concept, would be represented by a horizontal straight line. A flatter slope
of the demand curve is associated with a more elastic demand.
6. (Unit: Production, Cost, and the Perfect Competition Model. See
Chapter 3 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (B) Including a second worker caused a marginal increase
of seven in cars produced. This is the highest marginal return.
7. (Unit: Production, Cost, and the Perfect Competition Model. See
Chapter 3 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (E) Accounting profit doesn’t include all of the implicit
costs of doing business, which includes the cost of financial capital.
8. (Unit: Production, Cost, and the Perfect Competition Model. See
Chapter 3 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (D) The most profitable option for the company—when
taking into account the profit it can earn—is if it opens two plants. After
that, the marginal cost of opening a new plant is higher than the marginal
return. When the company has two plants, it can produce 24 planes for
which it can earn $100,000 for each, while it will have to pay $2,000,000
for opening two plants. This means that the company will earn $2,400,000 $2,000,000 = $400,000.
9. (Unit: Production, Cost, and the Perfect Competition Model. See
Chapter 3 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (B) One of the assumptions of a perfectly competitive
market is that all of the consumers have all the relevant information they
need to make a purchase and that they are rational.
10. (Unit: Production, Cost, and the Perfect Competition Model. See
Chapter 3 for similar questions.)

ANSWER: (B) If Florida loses roughly $50,000,000 every year,
placing a tax on alcoholic drinks would be a way for society to offset
economic costs.
11. (Unit: Imperfect Competition. See Chapter 4 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (E) This is a concept within game theory known as the
Nash equilibrium.
12. (Unit: Imperfect Competition. See Chapter 4 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (B) While monopolists get to extract economic surplus,
the general quantity made by companies is determined by where marginal
costs equal the price of the product.
13. (Unit: Imperfect Competition. See Chapter 4 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (D) Monopolies are usually considered a highly
ineffective market structure as they are characterized by high prices and
lower quantities compared with other market structures.
14. (Unit: Imperfect Competition. See Chapter 4 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (B) Both of these are examples of natural monopolies due
to the fact that they occurred through regular market conditions, but there is
only one company operating in each market.
15. (Unit: Factor Markets. See Chapter 5 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (C) Companies are price takers in such a market, and the
level of output produced where companies can earn a profit is where
marginal revenue equals marginal costs.
16. (Unit: Factor Markets. See Chapter 5 for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (C) Despite the fact that subsidies will lower the price of
the product, these subsidies paid by the government are still something

financed by taxpayers. For this reason, it is still theoretically possible that
despite the decreasing prices, there is a net loss in societal welfare.
17. (Unit: Market Failure and the Role of Government. See Chapter 6
for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (C) The problem of people not paying for a public good is
called the free rider problem or free-rider dilemma.
18. (Unit: Market Failure and the Role of Government. See Chapter 6
for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (D) The Gini coefficient is a measurement of income
inequality. The closer the value is to 1, the higher the level of income
inequality.
19. (Unit: Market Failure and the Role of Government. See Chapter 6
for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (D) This is a positive externality. Tina’s students pay for
their education, and the end result is a positive externality of knowledge.
20. (Unit: Market Failure and the Role of Government. See Chapter 6
for similar questions.)
ANSWER: (B) This is an example of a regressive tax system. As Jane
earned a higher revenue, she had to pay a smaller level of her revenue in
taxes. In 2015, Jane paid $5,000 in taxes, which when divided by her
revenue of $25,000 is equal to 20 percent of her revenue. For 2016, she paid
10 percent, 8.9 percent in 2018, and just 5 percent in 2019. As the
percentage income of her taxes paid decreased, this is an example of a
regressive tax systems.

CHAPTER 1
Basic Economic Concepts
21. Deirdre has one free hour to practice the piano for an
upcoming school concert or work at the library for $7 per hour or
babysit her neighbor’s 12-year-old son for $10 per hour. She chooses
to practice the piano. What is the opportunity cost of practicing the
piano?
(A) The opportunity cost would be $17 because she chose not
to participate in these activities.
(B) Without knowing the marginal value of practicing the
piano, there is no way of knowing the true opportunity cost.
(C) The opportunity cost would be $20 because she needs to
babysit for two hours to earn a profit.
(D) The opportunity cost would be $10 because it is the wage
for the most profitable alternative.
(E) The opportunity cost would be $3 because it is the
monetary difference between two alternative choices.
22. After dedicating two hours to studying for the AP economics
exam, Seth chooses to spend an additional hour studying. Which of the
following is most likely TRUE?

(A) The marginal benefit of the additional hour is at least as
great as the marginal cost of the additional hour.
(B) The marginal cost of the additional hour is less than the
marginal benefit of the additional hour.
(C) Both the marginal benefit and marginal cost are always
equal in this scenario.
(D) The marginal benefit of the second hour is less than the
marginal benefit of the additional hour.
(E) The marginal cost of the second hour is greater than the
marginal cost of the additional hour.
23. Which of these choices is NOT a factor of production?
(A) capital, the machinery, factories, and industrial equipment
used to produce goods
(B) labor, the human work hours used during production
(C) entrepreneurship, input by the decision maker who
allocates production factors
(D) land, including natural resources such as oil and timber
reserves as well as land itself
(E) money, the financial capital used to purchase goods and
services used in production
24. The concave shape of the production possibilities curve
implies the notion of
(A) increasing opportunity costs
(B) comparative advantage

(C) marginal analysis
(D) allocation of limited resources with unlimited material
wants
(E) MB = MC
25. It is beneficial for two countries to trade only when there is
(A) a mutually beneficial trade agreement
(B) increasing returns to scale
(C) decreasing returns to scale
(D) an absolute advantage in production between the two
countries
(E) a comparative advantage in production between the two
countries
26. If a society overallocates its resources, then
(A) consumer spending would increase because of an increase
in demand
(B) marginal benefit would be greater than marginal cost
(C) the opportunity cost of producing one more unit would
increase exponentially
(D) marginal benefit would be less than marginal cost
(E) marginal benefit would equal marginal cost
27. Richard and Michele have to mow their lawn and walk their
dog on Sunday morning. It takes Richard one hour to either mow the
lawn or walk the dog. Michele can also walk the dog in one hour, but

she needs two hours to mow the lawn. What should Richard and
Michele do?
(A) Michele should walk the dog because she has absolute
advantage in mowing the lawn.
(B) Richard should walk the dog because he has comparative
advantage in mowing the lawn.
(C) Richard should mow the lawn because he has comparative
advantage in mowing the lawn.
(D) Michele should mow the lawn because she has
comparative advantage in mowing the lawn.
(E) Richard should walk the dog because he has comparative
advantage in walking the dog.
28. Joe works as a manager at a fast-food restaurant. He has
enough supplies to make 500 hot dogs and 400 hamburgers to sell to
customers. If he uses all of his supplies to make hot dogs, he could
make 1,000 hot dogs and no hamburgers. If he uses all of his supplies
to make hamburgers instead, he could make 800 hamburgers and no
hot dogs. What is Joe’s opportunity cost if he uses all of his supplies to
make hot dogs?
(A) The opportunity cost is 800 hamburgers because this is
the maximum quantity of hamburgers that Joe could make.
(B) The opportunity cost is 400 hamburgers because this is
what Joe is giving up to make hot dogs.
(C) The opportunity cost is 500 hot dogs because this is the
increase in hot dog production.
(D) The opportunity cost is 1,000 hot dogs because this is the
amount of hot dogs produced.

(E) The prices of hot dogs and hamburgers are necessary to
calculate opportunity cost in this example.
29. Mineral deposits, human capital, entrepreneurship, and use of
technology and machinery are all examples of
(A) factors of production
(B) superior and inferior goods
(C) elements sometimes needed to move an existing company
overseas
(D) public goods
(E) material wants and needs
30. The law of increasing costs is best defined as
(A) when the price of a good rises, the quantity does not fall
(B) more of a product is produced, the greater its opportunity
cost
(C) one obtains more of a good, the marginal utility (the value
from one more unit) will decrease
(D) the economy grows, government spending will increase as
well
(E) all costs are opportunity costs
31. A country is said to have a comparative advantage over
another country when
(A) it can produce a good at a lower opportunity cost than
another country

(B) it can produce a good using more resources per unit of
output than another country
(C) there is a higher degree of specialization and division of
labor compared to another country
(D) when comparing each country’s production possibilities
frontiers, one country is operating at maximum efficiency and
output
(E) one country’s production possibilities frontier is shifted
further to the right compared with another country’s production
possibilities frontier
32. Suppose both Spain and Germany produce soccer balls and
golf balls. Spain can produce soccer balls at a lower opportunity cost
than Germany. Germany can produce golf balls at a lower opportunity
cost than Spain. According to the law of comparative advantage,
(A) Germany should stop producing soccer balls; Spain
should stop producing golf balls; Spain and Germany should
establish a trade for the product they stopped producing.
(B) Germany should stop producing golf balls; Spain should
stop producing soccer balls.
(C) Germany should increase production of golf balls and
decrease the production of soccer balls.
(D) Spain should increase the production of soccer balls and
decrease the production of golf balls.
(E) none of the above
33. Which of the following would occur if the United States has a
significant surge in immigration?

(A) The production possibilities curve would shift to the left.
(B) The production possibilities curve would shift to the right.
(C) Demand for a significant number of products would fall.
(D) Nash equilibrium would be established.
(E) The production possibilities curve would be closer to 0.
34. Which of the following is an example of a non-rivalrous
good?
(A) planes, because there is a limited number of them
(B) gold, because it is highly expensive
(C) cars, because they don’t have a realistic substitute
(D) air, because people consuming it don’t significantly
impact supply
(E) platinum, because there is a highly limited market for it
35. Your school decides to build a new performing arts center.
What is the opportunity cost of the performing arts center?
(A) the money used in construction of the performing arts
center
(B) the cost of building the performing arts center now rather
than waiting until next year
(C) any other good or service that cannot be provided right
now because of resources used for the new performing arts center
(D) cannot be determined without knowing what the next best
option was for using the resources that went to the performing arts

center
(E) none of the above
36. Which of the following is accurate about a resource that has a
non-zero cost to consume it?
(A) It is a scarce good.
(B) It is not a scarce good.
(C) It is a perfectly elastic good.
(D) It is a perfectly inelastic good.
(E) It is in a state of Nash equilibrium.
37. Marginal analysis is best defined as
(A) the additional benefit received from the consumption of
the next unit of a good or service
(B) the additional cost from the consumption of the next unit
of a good or service
(C) analyzing the combination of goods and services that
provide the best benefit to society
(D) making decisions based upon the marginal benefits and
marginal costs of that decision
(E) when businesses use their resources to produce goods and
services for which they have a comparative advantage
38. An economic system is characterized as emphasizing private
property and competition, and prices inform buyers and sellers how to
allocate their resources. No public sector exists in the country. This
economic system would be known as a

(A) mixed system
(B) market system
(C) socialist system
(D) command system
(E) barter system
39. The number of items that Italy and France can produce in a
day is indicated in the following table. Using the theory of
comparative advantage, what would be the most likely outcome?

(A) Italy should produce both goods, as it has a comparative
advantage.
(B) France should produce both goods, as it has an absolute
advantage in both.
(C) France should produce cheese, while Italy should produce
olive oil.
(D) Italy should produce cheese, while France should produce
olive oil.
(E) Both Italy and France should produce only cheese.
40. Which of the following best reflects the concept of absolute
advantage?

(A) if a country has a smaller public debt compared with
another country
(B) if a country can produce a good or service better
compared with another country
(C) if a country could produce a good or service better than
any other country with the same quantity of resources
(D) if a country’s production possibilities curve is constantly
shifting to the left as the output of the economy grows
(E) if a country has a higher GDP compared with another
country
41. When production takes place at a point on the production
possibilities curve, and MB = MC, production is
(A) productively efficient but not allocatively efficient
(B) allocatively efficient but not productively efficient
(C) productively efficient and allocatively efficient
(D) neither productively efficient nor allocatively efficient
(E) none of the above
42. The basic economic questions being answered by the
decisions of buyers and sellers in the marketplace occur in a
(A) mixed economy
(B) command economy
(C) traditional economy
(D) market economy

(E) barter economy
Refer to the following graph for questions 43 and 44.

43. A production possibilities curve passing through which point
on the graph would indicate a recession?
(A) point A
(B) point B
(C) point C
(D) point D
(E) point E
44. What would a shift in production from point E on the graph to
point D indicate?
(A) Laptop production declined, indicating a possible
recession.
(B) Radio production increased, indicating an expanding
economy.

(C) The firm became more efficient at radio production and
less efficient at laptop production.
(D) The firm decided to produce more radios and fewer
laptops and its current production capacity hasn’t changed.
(E) Laptop supply costs are rising.
45. What would cause the production possibilities curve to shift to
the left?
(A) an increase in the availability of raw materials
(B) factory capacity expansion
(C) a decision to produce more of one item and less of another
(D) shorter work hours
(E) less vacation time
46. Based on the information in the following table, which of the
following countries is in a recession?

(A) country A because its economy has stagnated throughout
the year
(B) countries B, C, and D because they had at least one
quarter of decline
(C) country B because it had a sharp decline in the final
quarter
(D) countries C and D because they had two different quarters
of economic decline
(E) country D because it had two consecutive quarters of
declining GDP
47. A country allows buyers and sellers to make their own
choices. Ownership of private property is allowed, but the government
owns companies in key industries and makes production decisions for
these industries. What type of economy does this country have?
(A) a command economy
(B) a traditional economy
(C) a mixed economy
(D) a market economy
(E) a barter economy
48. What is an example of the paradox of value?
(A) gasoline costing more per gallon than crude oil
(B) solar power costing more per watt than coal power
(C) acid rain caused by power plant emissions

(D) rubies costing more than bottled water
(E) a steak costing more than a hamburger
49. What item is considered a durable good?
(A) a box of pasta
(B) a truck
(C) a T-shirt
(D) a pair of shoes
(E) a cartridge of printer ink
50. Buyers and sellers exchange goods and services directly
without trading them for money in which type of economy?
(A) a mixed economy
(B) a market economy
(C) a barter economy
(D) a command economy
(E) a traditional economy
51. Which situation best illustrates the concept of marginal
utility?
(A) A nation trades goods for which it has a comparative
advantage.
(B) A state raises taxes on jewelry.

(C) A consumer purchases three cans of soda but does not
want to buy a fourth can.
(D) Gold increases in value compared with the euro.
(E) Taxes increase to fund health care and retirement benefits.
52. France and Switzerland produce cheese and chocolate. France
has a competitive advantage in cheese production while Switzerland
has a competitive advantage in chocolate production. If France places
a trade embargo on Switzerland, what is likely to happen with cheese
and chocolate production in each country?
(A) France will produce more cheese and Switzerland will
produce more chocolate.
(B) France will produce more chocolate and Switzerland will
produce more cheese.
(C) France will produce less chocolate and Switzerland will
produce less cheese.
(D) France will produce less chocolate and Switzerland will
produce more cheese.
(E) France will produce more cheese and Switzerland will
produce less chocolate.
The following graph shows a nation’s production possibilities curve.
Use this graph for questions 53 and 54.

53. What does this curve indicate about the nation producing
these two crops?
(A) The curve is not valid, because a production possibilities
curve must be concave.
(B) The nation’s resources are equally suitable for barley or
pea production.
(C) With each additional unit of barley not produced, the
nation can produce a larger amount of peas.
(D) With each additional unit of peas not produced, the nation
can produce a larger amount of barley.
(E) The nation has increasing opportunity costs.
54. What would happen if the nation developed specialized
resources for barley and pea production?
(A) The curve would become concave but would not shift left
or right.
(B) The curve would shift to the left and remain flat.

(C) The curve would shift to the right and remain flat.
(D) The curve would become convex.
(E) The curve would shift to the right and become concave.
The following graph shows the production possibilities curve for a
bakery that produces cookies and loaves of bread. Refer to this graph for
questions 55 and 56.

55. The bakery is currently producing 140 loaves of bread. If it
decides to produce 160 loaves of bread instead, what is the opportunity
cost for the bakery?
(A) 200 cookies
(B) 600 cookies
(C) 500 cookies
(D) 300 cookies
(E) 100 cookies

56. If the bakery is producing cookies and bread at point A on the
production possibilities curve, and then one of its ovens breaks down
and its production moves to point D, what is the opportunity cost of
the broken oven?
(A) 80 units of bread
(B) 140 units of bread
(C) 60 units of bread
(D) 200 cookies
(E) 300 cookies
This production possibilities curve shows bread and car production
possibilities for a nation. Refer to it for questions 57 and 58.

57. If the nation’s production shifts from point A to point B, this
represents
(A) an economic expansion
(B) a recession

(C) the introduction of a biased technology for car
manufacturing
(D) the introduction of a biased technology for bread
manufacturing
(E) a decline in bread production efficiency
58. A shift in production from point A to point B results in
(A) a higher bread quantity
(B) a lower car quantity
(C) a higher car quantity
(D) the same car quantity
(E) both A and D
59. A nation produces spinach and lettuce. A biased technology is
introduced that improves spinach production. If the quantity of spinach
produced does not change, the
(A) lettuce quantity will increase
(B) lettuce quantity will stay the same
(C) lettuce quantity will fall
(D) production possibilities curve will shift to the left
(E) maximum production quantity for lettuce will increase
60. The law of diminishing marginal utility refers to
(A) the marginal utility from consuming one additional item
will fall

(B) the marginal utility from consuming one additional item
will increase
(C) marginal benefit should equal marginal cost in a market
(D) MC > MB when the market is in disequilibrium
(E) price floors help establish MB > MC
61. Marginal utility refers to
(A) the change in total utility as a result of the consumption of
an additional unit of a good
(B) the change in a firm’s total cost from hiring an additional
unit of labor
(C) the change in saving caused by change in disposable
income
(D) the additional cost of production for one more unit of
output
(E) the additional cost incurred for the consumption of the
next unit of a good
62. Peter loves French fries, and his friends dared him to eat
nothing but French fries all day long. He greatly enjoyed eating 50
French fries, but when he consumed another 50 fries, he enjoyed them
less and less because his stomach began to hurt. What does this
scenario represent?
(A) marginal utility
(B) law of diminishing marginal utility
(C) MC = MB

(D) MB > MC
(E) A, B, and D
63. In the market system, resources are allocated in which ways?
I. Customs and traditions influence which goods and services
are produced.
II. Voluntary exchange influences which goods and services
are produced.
III. Government determines which goods and services are
produced.
(A) I only
(B) II only
(C) I and III
(D) I and II
(E) I, II, and III
64. Daigoro Inc. is a Japanese company that operates and is fully
owned by the Japanese government. It produces a special type of soy
sauce. The United States has implemented a 20 percent tariff on its soy
sauce that usually costs $100 per case. Which of the following would
then occur?
(A) Japanese consumers would have to pay $80 for the
product,
as this will help finance Diagoro’s operations.
(B) Japanese consumers would have to pay $120 for the
product, as this would make the product more expensive.

(C) Both Japanese and U.S. consumers would have to pay
$120 as a result of the tariff.
(D) The company would have to pay $20 for each of the soy
sauce cases that enters the U.S. market.
(E) The price of the product in the United States would likely
be $120 for U.S. domestic consumers, making the product less
competitive.
65. The substitution effect states that as the price of a good falls,
(A) it becomes more expensive in comparison with other
goods
(B) it becomes less expensive in comparison with other goods
(C) consumers gain more buying power
(D) consumers lose buying power
(E) consumer income rises
66. The income effect states that as the price of a good falls,
(A) it becomes more expensive in comparison with other
goods
(B) it becomes less expensive in comparison with other goods
(C) consumers gain more buying power
(D) consumers lose buying power
(E) consumer income rises
67. Quantity demanded for cars would fall but demand for cars
would remain the same, if

(A) the price of gasoline rose
(B) trucks became more popular compared with cars
(C) a rise in auto accidents made consumers worried about car
safety
(D) car manufacturers left the market
(E) bus fare decreased so fewer people drove cars to work
68. Quantity demanded for sugar beets would increase but
demand for sugar beets would remain the same, if
(A) researchers discovered that an artificial sweetener had
health risks
(B) consumers switched to regular soda instead of diet soda
(C) more farmers began growing sugar beets
(D) a trade embargo reduced the supply of cane sugar
(E) sugar beets became a biofuel feedstock
69. The number of buyers in the market and the number of
producers in the market are
(A) determinants of elasticity
(B) determinants of demand
(C) determinants of supply
(D) determined by the government in a market economy
(E) determined by the factors of production

70. Quantity supplied for mushrooms would increase but supply
for mushrooms would remain the same, if
(A) more farms began growing mushrooms
(B) a research study highlighted the health benefits of
mushrooms
(C) the price of fertilizer, a production input, declined
(D) the government granted a tax credit to mushroom farmers
(E) a new type of tractor made mushroom farmers more
efficient
71. Quantity supplied for strawberries would decrease but supply
for strawberries would remain the same, if
(A) wages for farm workers rose
(B) strawberry farms experienced a drought
(C) consumer income falls
(D) strawberry farmers expect the strawberry price to rise
(E) researchers develop more efficient strawberry harvesting
tools
72. If the price of a television set increases by 10 percent and the
quantity demanded for television sets decreases by 50 percent,
(A) elasticity is 5 and television set demand is price elastic
(B) elasticity is 0.2 and television set demand is price inelastic
(C) elasticity is 50 and television set demand is elastic

(D) elasticity is 10 and television set demand is elastic
(E) elasticity is 0.02 and television set demand is price
inelastic
73. A movie star puts on a particular sunscreen at the beach, and
that brand of sunscreen becomes much more popular. This will NOT
increase
(A) the market price of that sunscreen
(B) quantity supplied for that sunscreen
(C) supply for that sunscreen
(D) demand for that sunscreen
(E) quantity demanded for that sunscreen
74. A new diet makes bananas more popular with consumers. A
new type of fertilizer makes banana trees more productive. As a result,
(A) the market price of bananas will increase
(B) the market price of bananas will decrease
(C) equilibrium quantity for bananas will increase
(D) equilibrium quantity for bananas will decrease
(E) equilibrium quantity for bananas will not change
75. If the price of a used car increases by 40 percent and the
quantity demanded for used cars decreases by 10 percent,
(A) elasticity is 0.25 and used car demand is price inelastic
(B) elasticity is 4 and used car demand is price elastic

(C) elasticity is 0.4 and used car demand is price inelastic
(D) elasticity is 2.5 and used car demand is price elastic
(E) used car demand is neither price inelastic nor elastic
76. Which regulation could result in a deadweight loss?
(A) price supports for agricultural goods
(B) a minimum wage law
(C) a rent control law
(D) a maximum interest rate on payday loans
(E) all of the above
77. When the market equilibrium price and the market
equilibrium quantity are located at the same point,
(A) oversupply exists
(B) undersupply exists
(C) a deadweight loss is not present
(D) an effective price floor is present
(E) an effective price ceiling is present
78. A consumer buys three apples. Which purchase prices would
reflect the law of diminishing marginal utility?
(A) $1 for the first apple, $2 for the second apple, and $3 for
the third apple
(B) $2 for each apple

(C) $3 for the first apple, $2 for the second apple, and $3 for
the third apple
(D) $3 for the first apple, $2 for the second apple, and $1 for
the third apple
(E) $6 for all three apples
79. Why do tariffs cause deadweight costs?
(A) because they are a tax imposed on a foreign company
which the company has to pay for
(B) because they are a tax imposed on a foreign company
which carries over to domestic consumers who have to pay for it
(C) because they are an administrative barrier to entry which
foreign companies have to pay in order to enter a market
(D) because they limit the number of products that can be
imported from a foreign country, which enables domestic
producers to set a higher price
(E) because they limit on how much a company can charge
for its products, limiting its ability to make an economic profit
80. The United States has decided to enact a tariff of 10 percent
on Chinese oil exports. If the price of oil is $80 per barrel, how much
will a barrel of oil cost domestic producers after including the tariff ?
(A) $72
(B) $80
(C) $86
(D) $88

(E) $90
81. Germany has decided that Chinese solar panels are flooding
its market. The German government decided that this is preventing
domestic producers from developing their own products and that this
may make them overly dependent on Chinese solar panels. They have
decided to limit the import of Chinese solar panels to 10,000 every
year. What is this an example of ?
(A) a tariff
(B) a nonregulatory barrier to entry
(C) a quota
(D) a tax on imports
(E) a trade violation
82. Assume that a consumer was forced to choose between the
five products in the following list and also assume that he is a perfectly
rational consumer. How would he make his decision?

(A) He would choose a computer because it has the highest
increase to his utility.
(B) He would choose apples because they would present the
largest increase in utility.
(C) He would choose the luxurious table because it has the
best ratio of price compared with the benefit it brings to society.
(D) He would choose a car because it is the most expensive
option.
(E) He would choose a car because rational consumers make
decisions by buying the least expensive item.
83. Which of the following BEST reflects an example of a sunk
cost?
(A) when a company has to hire an additional worker to
produce an extra product
(B) when a company is trying to acquire another and the costs
of the acquisition are not public knowledge
(C) when an accounting company has to pay to settle a lawsuit
it lost
(D) when a public relations company needs to rent an office
for $10,000
(E) when a buyer decides to purchase a luxury car for
$150,000
84. Thompson Inc. has several potential companies which it can
cooperate with. The opportunity cost of not cooperating with company
A is $500, while the opportunity cost for not cooperating with
company B is $2,000. The marginal cost of cooperating with company

C is $2,500, while the marginal revenue would be $2,000. Finally, the
marginal revenue of cooperating with company D is $3,000 and the
marginal cost of cooperating with this company is $5,000. Which
company should Thompson Inc. cooperate with?
(A) company A because it has a low opportunity cost
(B) company B because it had a higher opportunity cost
(C) both company C and D because marginal cost is larger
than revenue
(D) company C because it has the lowest marginal cost
(E) company D because it has the largest marginal revenue

CHAPTER 2
Supply and Demand
85. What will most likely result if the price of apples decreases?
(A) The quantity of apples demanded will increase.
(B) The supply of apples will decrease.
(C) The demand for apples will increase.
(D) The quantity of apples supplied will decrease.
(E) none of the above
86. If Michael’s average yearly income increases and it is
observed that his demand for steak has increased, then steak must be
considered
(A) an inferior good
(B) a normal good
(C) a determinant of demand
(D) a determinant of supply
(E) a necessity

87. If Peter’s average yearly income increases, and it is observed
that his demand for thrift-store-bought shoes decreases, then thriftstore-bought shoes must be considered
(A) a normal good
(B) a shortage good
(C) a necessity
(D) an inferior good
(E) a determinant of demand
88. Suppose it is necessary for tin to be used in the production of
guitar strings. If the price of tin decreases and all other variables are
constant, what will most likely result?
(A) The demand for silver will increase.
(B) The quantity demanded for guitars will decrease.
(C) The demand for guitars will increase.
(D) The supply of guitars will decrease.
(E) The supply of guitar strings will increase.
89. According to the law of demand,
(A) as the price of a good or service increases, the demand
will shift to the right
(B) as the price of a good or service increases, the demand
will shift to the left
(C) there is an inverse relationship between quantity
demanded of a good or service and the price of that good or service

(D) as prices for a good or service increase, consumers will
begin to use substitute goods
(E) as the price of a good or service increases, the quantity
demanded will increase
90. A hurricane destroys a significant supply of bananas in 2011.
As a result, the price of bananas increases. What prediction may be
made regarding the supply of apples, a substitute good, when its
market is in equilibrium?
(A) The apple price rises, and the apple supply will increase.
(B) The apple quantity supplied will increase.
(C) The apple price falls, and the apple supply will decrease.
(D) The apple price falls, and the apple quantity supplied will
decrease.
(E) Both the apple price and the apple quantity supplied are
undetermined.
91. What is likely to happen if the price of figs increases?
(A) The supply of figs will increase.
(B) The quantity of figs demanded will decrease.
(C) The demand for figs will increase.
(D) The quantity of figs supplied will increase.
(E) none of the above
92. If the demand for tennis rackets increases, which prediction
can be made regarding tennis balls?

(A) The demand for tennis balls will fall.
(B) The supply of tennis balls will remain the same.
(C) The price of tennis balls will remain the same.
(D) The supply of tennis balls will fall.
(E) The price and the quantity supplied of tennis balls will
increase.
93. Which of the following situations will cause the demand
curve for chicken, a normal good, to shift to the left?
(A) Consumer incomes decrease.
(B) Consumer incomes increase.
(C) The price of steak decreases.
(D) There is a decrease in the cost of raising chickens on a
farm.
(E) There is a scientific discovery that relates eating chicken
to lower blood pressure.
94. Mr. Harrington produces hot dog buns. Hot dogs and hot dog
buns are complementary goods. He is most likely to sell his hot dog
buns at a higher price if
(A) the price of hot dogs decreases
(B) there is an increase in consumer income
(C) the price of hot dogs increases
(D) a new technology is developed enabling an increase in hot
dog production

(E) a new technology is developed enabling an increase in hot
dog bun production
95. The equilibrium price is established
(A) at the next price above where the demand and supply
curves intersect
(B) when the quantity supplied equals the quantity demanded
(C) at the next price below where the demand and supply
curves intersect
(D) when you take the difference between the two lowest
points plotted on the demand and supply curves
(E) at the price where either the demand or supply curve
becomes horizontal
Refer to the following demand curve for baseballs to answer question
96.

96. If the quantity demanded for baseballs shifts from point B to
point A, this represents
(A) an increase in the price of the good
(B) an increase in consumer income
(C) an increase in the price of a complementary good
(D) an increase in the price of a substitute good
(E) none of the above
97. Doherty Industries is a leading producer of an energy drink.
Which of the following will cause Doherty Industries to offer more of
the product at all possible sale prices?
(A) A competitor lowers the price of the product.
(B) The price of a key ingredient increases.

(C) The price of a key ingredient decreases.
(D) The demand for the energy drink decreases.
(E) The demand is perfectly elastic.
98. Suppose the demand for a product is inelastic. If a producer
wishes to increase total revenue, it should
(A) decrease prices
(B) decrease the quantity supplied
(C) increase the quantity supplied
(D) hire more workers
(E) raise prices
99. Which is an important factor to make the demand for a good
inelastic?
(A) It is a necessity.
(B) There are many substitutes.
(C) It is a luxury item.
(D) There are many cross-price substitutes.
(E) A significant portion of consumers’ budgets goes to
purchasing the good.
100. There is a 10 percent rise in the price of bottled water. This
creates a 40 percent change in the quantity demanded. The demand for
bottled water is considered to be
(A) perfectly inelastic

(B) elastic
(C) inelastic
(D) perfectly elastic
(E) none of the above
101. If a 30 percent rise in gas prices creates a 0 percent decrease
in the quantity demanded, the demand is said to be
(A) inelastic
(B) perfectly elastic
(C) elastic
(D) perfectly inelastic
(E) none of the above
102. Sally works at a clothing store and the manager has cut her
weekly shift from 30 to 20 hours, reducing her income. As a result, her
demand for fresh vegetables decreases and her demand for canned
vegetables increases. In this example, which type of good is a can of
vegetables?
(A) a shortage good
(B) an inferior good
(C) a necessity
(D) a capital good
(E) a normal good
Use the following graph to answer questions 103 and 104.

103. All of the following are factors that contributed to Demand 1
shifting to Demand 2 EXCEPT
(A) an increase in consumer income
(B) a decrease in the price of a substitute good
(C) an increase in the number of buyers in a market
(D) consumers expect the price of the good to increase in the
future
(E) the product’s popularity with consumers increased
104. All of the following are factors that contributed to Supply 1
shifting to Supply 2 EXCEPT
(A) the price of a key ingredient to the product decreased
(B) the number of sellers decreased
(C) sellers expect the price of the good to rise in the future

(D) the government increased a tax on the product
(E) the product is no longer subsidized by the government
105. An effective price ceiling is usually set
(A) above the equilibrium price and quantity
(B) at the intersection of the supply and demand curves
(C) by subtracting the highest price for supply and the lowest
point for demand on their respective curves
(D) below the equilibrium price
(E) none of the above
106. Which factor contributes to price elasticity of supply?
(A) time
(B) consumer surplus
(C) consumer expectations regarding future prices
(D) producer tastes and preferences
(E) the availability of a producer surplus
107. Consumer surplus is measured by
(A) the area above the supply curve but below the price
equilibrium
(B) the sum of buyer and seller surplus
(C) the area above the supply curve and above the price
equilibrium

(D) the quotient of percentage change in quantity supplied and
percentage change in price
(E) the quotient of percentage change in quantity demanded
and percentage change in price
108. A grape farm uses fertilizer to produce grapes. Which will
occur if the price of fertilizer increases?
(A) The demand for grapes will increase.
(B) The quantity of grapes demanded will increase.
(C) The supply of grapes will decrease.
(D) The quantity of fertilizer demanded will increase.
(E) The supply of grapes will increase.
109. If the supply curve is a line with an upward slope, an
increase in demand will cause
(A) an increase in prices and a larger quantity sold
(B) an increase in prices and a smaller quantity sold
(C) a decrease in prices and a larger quantity sold
(D) a decrease in prices and a smaller quantity sold
(E) none of the above
110. A price increase in product X resulted in an increase in
demand for product Z. Product Z is most likely a(n)
(A) inferior good
(B) complementary good

(C) substitute good
(D) normal good
(E) factor of production
111. A limit on interest rates charged by a credit card company is
an example of a
(A) price floor
(B) price ceiling
(C) price support
(D) consequence of minimum wage law
(E) negative externality
112. When quantity demanded is greater than quantity supplied,
there is a(n)
(A) negative externality
(B) shortage in the market
(C) surplus in the market
(D) increase in government regulation
(E) decrease in unemployment
113. If the price of a good increases, the most likely result would
be for the
(A) quantity supplied to increase
(B) quantity supplied to decrease

(C) demand to increase
(D) supply to decrease
(E) demand to decrease
Use the following chart to solve questions 114 and 115.

114. What is point A commonly known as?
(A) deadweight loss
(B) market equilibrium
(C) price discrimination
(D) Nash equilibrium
(D) marginal revenue
(E) inflated value
115. Which of the following could shift point A to the right?

(A) if a substitute good were subsidized by the government
(B) if a tariff was implemented on the product by the
government
(C) if the price of a complementary good decreased
(D) if the purchasing power of consumers decreased
(E) if the good in question became less attractive to
consumers
116. Another name for excess supply is
(A) disequilibrium
(B) equilibrium point
(C) Gini ratio
(D) surplus
(E) shortage
117. If a market surplus exists, establishing an effective price
floor would
(A) reduce a market surplus
(B) increase a market surplus
(C) remove the need for government regulation
(D) decrease demand
(E) increase government regulation
118. The number of substitutes for a good and time are known as

(A) determinants of supply
(B) determinants of demand
(C) determinants of elasticity
(D) factors of production
(E) elements of the Gini ratio
119. A warm winter results in a larger supply of wheat for the
year. Corn is a substitute good for wheat. What happens to wheat and
corn prices?
(A) The corn price stays the same and the wheat price falls.
(B) The corn price falls and the wheat price falls.
(C) The corn price rises and the wheat price falls.
(D) The corn price stays the same and the wheat price rises.
(E) The corn price and the wheat price both increase.
120. Suppose the price of iPhones increases 2 percent and the
quantity demanded for iPhones decreases by 4 percent, then
(A) elasticity is 2 and demand is price elastic
(B) elasticity is 0.5 and demand is price inelastic
(C) elasticity is 8 and demand is price elastic
(D) elasticity is .05 and demand is price inelastic
(E) answer cannot be determined without knowing the length
of time the product is on the market with the increase in price

121. Demand for hamburgers increases. Hamburgers and
hamburger buns are complementary goods. What happens to the
demand curve for hamburger buns and the price?
(A) The price of hamburger buns does not change and the
demand curve shifts to the left.
(B) The price of hamburger buns does not change and the
demand curve shifts to the right.
(C) The price of hamburger buns increases and the demand
curve remains the same.
(D) The price of hamburger buns increases and the demand
curve shifts to the right.
(E) The price of hamburger buns increases and the demand
curve shifts to the left.
122. Suppose the market is in equilibrium for razor blades where
the marginal benefit equals the marginal cost. If the government
imposes a tax on razor blades, what may result?
(A) deadweight loss
(B) an increase in demand
(C) an increase in supply
(D) a price ceiling
(E) a price floor
123. Deadweight loss refers to
(A) the lost benefit to society caused by the movement away
from the market equilibrium quantity

(B) the gained benefit to suppliers caused by the increase in
the market equilibrium quantity
(C) the incremental benefit or loss when the consumer
increases consumption by one additional unit (marginal utility)
(D) the legal maximum price above which a product cannot
be sold (price ceiling)
(E) the legal minimum price below which a product cannot be
sold (price floor)
124. If you calculate the price elasticity of a good to be 0, you are
correct to assume
(A) it is a normal good
(B) it is a luxury good
(C) people will buy the good regardless of the price
(D) the good has few substitutes
(E) the good has few complements
125. If there is joint demand for olives and mushrooms, then
olives and mushrooms are
(A) substitute goods
(B) complementary goods
(C) normal goods
(D) inferior goods
(E) luxury goods

The following graph shows supply and demand for artichokes. Refer to
it for questions 126 and 127.

126. Bell peppers are a substitute for artichokes. If the price of
bell peppers increases, demand for artichokes could shift from
(A) D1 to D2
(B) D2 to D1
(C) D3 to D2
(D) D3 to D1
(E) The demand would not change.
127. Bell peppers are a substitute for artichokes. Tomatoes are
also a substitute for artichokes. If a 10 percent price drop for bell
peppers would shift artichoke demand from D2 to D1 and a 10 percent
price drop for tomatoes would shift artichoke demand from
D3 to D1, then

(A) tomatoes are a perfect substitute
(B) bell peppers are a perfect substitute
(C) tomatoes are a better substitute
(D) bell peppers are a better substitute
(E) tomatoes and bell peppers are equally substitutable
128. Consumer surplus is the
(A) difference between the price consumers would have been
willing to pay and the price they actually did pay
(B) price consumers would have been willing to pay minus
total variable costs
(C) price consumers would have been willing to pay in
addition to total variable costs
(D) price consumers would have been willing to pay in
addition to total fixed costs
(E) price consumers would have been willing to pay minus
total fixed and variable costs
129. The government establishes a price ceiling on good X above
the equilibrium price. The result would
(A) raise the price of the good
(B) raise the price of the good and decrease the quantity
demanded
(C) lower the price of the good and increase the quantity
demanded

(D) lower the price of the good
(E) have no effect on the price of the good or quantity
demanded
Refer to the following graph for question 130.

130. If peanut butter and grape jelly are complementary goods,
and the supply of grape jelly moves from S1 to S2,
(A) the demand curve for peanut butter will shift to the right
(B) the demand curve for peanut butter will remain the same
(C) the demand curve for peanut butter will shift to the left
(D) quantity demanded will decrease for peanut butter on the
same demand curve
(E) quantity demanded will increase for peanut butter on the
same demand curve

131. All of the following explain the downward slope of the
demand curve EXCEPT
(A) income effect
(B) substitution effect
(C) diminishing marginal utility
(D) complement effect
(E) the relationship between marginal benefit and marginal
cost
132. If an increase in technology in a perfectly competitive firm
only lowers the firm’s costs of production, the effect will be?

133. If tacos are a better substitute for burritos than hamburgers,
tacos will have
(A) a higher cross-price elasticity of demand
(B) a lower cross-price elasticity of demand
(C) the same cross-price elasticity of demand
(D) a negative cross-price elasticity of demand
(E) a zero cross-price elasticity of demand

134. Measuring allocative efficiency through allocation of
resources is best expressed in which formula?
(A) P = MC
(B) P = AR
(C) MB > MC
(D) MB = MC
(E) P = ATC
135. If corn oil is less substitutable for olive oil, then corn oil will
have
(A) a higher cross-price elasticity of demand
(B) a lower cross-price elasticity of demand
(C) the same cross-price elasticity of demand
(D) a negative cross-price elasticity of demand
(E) an infinite cross-price elasticity of demand
136. Price elasticity of demand is an extremely useful tool in
economics because
(A) it indicates the equilibrium price
(B) it predicts the market forces of supply and demand
(C) it shows how consumer behavior is affected by price
(D) it predicts how much firms will produce until the
shutdown point

(E) it indicates a balance between long-run and short-run
production costs
137. If the government establishes a price less than the market
equilibrium price, then it is a(n)
(A) effective price floor
(B) effective price ceiling
(C) barrier to entry
(D) barrier to exit
(E) none of the above
138. How do economists know that a good is a viable substitute?
(A) Calculate cross-elasticity and the result is a positive
number.
(B) Calculate cross-elasticity and the result is a negative
number.
(C) The product is price inelastic.
(D) Wait to see if the market forces of supply and demand
balance to equilibrium for the potential substitute.
(E) none of the above
139. The income effect refers to
(A) the change in the quantity demanded because of a change
in price of a relative good
(B) the change in the quantity demanded because of a change
in a consumer’s purchasing power

(C) the change in a consumer’s total utility from the
consumption of a good
(D) economic profits will be zero in the long run for a
perfectly competitive market
(E) collusive pricing tactics that oligopolies use
140. The price of a golf ball increases from $1 to $1.25. As a
result, golf ball sales fall by 50 percent. Demand for golf balls is
(A) inelastic
(B) perfectly inelastic
(C) elastic
(D) perfectly elastic
(E) neither elastic nor inelastic
141. The federal government increases mass transit subsidies, and
as a result, the price of a train ticket from New York to Boston
decreases by 40 percent. Ridership increases from 10 million to 12
million as a result. Demand for train tickets is
(A) inelastic
(B) perfectly inelastic
(C) elastic
(D) perfectly elastic
(E) neither elastic nor inelastic
142. Which of the following is the LEAST elastic good?

(A) oil
(B) cars
(C) insulin
(D) candy
(E) computers
143. A handbag designer sells luxury handbags for $2,000. The
designer raises the handbag price to $4,000 and demand for handbags
increases 50 percent. Which type of good is a handbag?
(A) a Giffen good
(B) a Veblen good
(C) an inferior good
(D) a substitute good
(E) a factor of production
144. A worker at a shoe store buys five pounds of rice, which is
less expensive than other food items, each week. The rice farm
increases the price of rice and the shoe store worker starts buying six
pounds of rice each week. What type of good is the rice?
(A) a Veblen good
(B) a normal good
(C) a substitute good
(D) a Giffen good
(E) a luxury good

145. Firm A and firm B offer high-speed Internet service. When
firm B increases the price of its Internet service by 20 percent, people
stop purchasing Internet service from firm B. In comparison with firm
B’s Internet service, firm A’s Internet service is a(n)
(A) complementary good
(B) perfect substitute
(C) imperfect substitute
(D) public good
(E) inferior good
146. The price elasticity of supply is shown in the table below.
Which of the following goods is inelastic?

(A) oil
(B) oil and apples
(C) apples, oranges, and cars
(D) apples, oranges, cars, and phones
(E) phones

Use the following graph to answer questions 147 and 148.

147. What factor would NOT contribute to a shift from Demand 2
to Demand 1?
(A) The product becomes less popular.
(B) A substitute product leaves the market.
(C) A recession reduces consumer income.
(D) Researchers discover the product’s health risks.
(E) A substitute product enters the market.
148. What factors would contribute to a shift from Supply 1 to
Supply 2?
(A) A key production input becomes less expensive.
(B) The factory becomes more efficient at producing this
product.

(C) Production workers’ wages decrease.
(D) The government reduces taxes on the factory.
(E) All of these factors would shift supply from S1 to S2.
Use the following charts to answer questions 149 and 150.

149. Which of the following is shown in the chart?
(A) unit elastic supply
(B) perfectly elastic supply
(C) perfectly inelastic supply
(D) relatively elastic supply
(E) relatively inelastic supply
150. How will the change in the supply by 10 percent impact the
price in the market conditions shown in the chart?

(A) The price will decrease by 10 percent.
(B) The price will increase by 10 percent.
(C) The price will remain the same.
(D) The price will increase by 20 percent.
(E) The price will decrease by 20 percent.
Use the following graph of rental prices and rental quantity to answer
questions 151 and 152.

151. What moves on the apartment supply and demand curves
would represent the passage of rent control laws that limited the
maximum apartment rental price?
(A) Apartments supplied would move to A2 and apartments
demanded would move to B2.

(B) Apartments supplied would move to A1 and apartments
demanded would move to B1.
(C) Apartments supplied would move to A1 and apartments
demanded would move to B2.
(D) Apartments supplied would move to A2 and apartments
demanded would move to B1.
(E) Apartments supplied would be equal to apartments
demanded at point C.
152. A shortage of rental apartments would result in a deadweight
loss. Which area would represent the value of this loss?
(A) the area between points A2, B2, and C
(B) the area between points B1, C, and A2
(C) the area between points B1, C, and A1
(D) the area between points A1, C, and B2
(E) not enough information available to answer this question
153. If the demand curve remains constant, and supply decreases,
the result will be
(A) a decrease in prices and a larger quantity sold
(B) an increase in prices and a smaller quantity sold
(C) a decrease in prices and a smaller quantity sold
(D) an increase in prices and a larger quantity sold
(E) none of the above

154. The price of sugar is currently $3 per pound. The
government establishes a price floor at $2 per pound. What happens to
sugar supply?
(A) There will be an oversupply of sugar.
(B) Quantity demanded will equal quantity supplied.
(C) There will be an undersupply of sugar.
(D) The supply curve for sugar will shift to the left.
(E) The supply curve for sugar will shift to the right.
155. Producer surplus is equal to
(A) the area to the left of the demand curve and below the
price equilibrium
(B) the area to the right of the demand curve and below the
price equilibrium
(C) the area to the left of the demand curve and above the
price equilibrium
(D) the area to the right of the demand curve and above the
price equilibrium
(E) the area to the right of the supply curve and to the left of
the demand curve
Refer to the following graph for questions 156 and 157.

156. If auto demand shifted from D2 to D1 because of consumer
expectations, what could this indicate?
(A) Consumers expect auto prices to fall.
(B) Consumers expect auto prices to rise.
(C) Consumers expect auto prices to stay the same.
(D) Consumers expect an economic expansion.
(E) Consumers expect raw materials costs for autos to
increase.
157. Which demand shift would indicate that consumers expect
higher auto prices?
(A) from D2 to D1
(B) from D3 to D2
(C) from D1 to D3

(D) from D3 to D1
(E) none of the above
158. The price elasticity of demand is shown in the following
table. For which of the products would the change in the quantity
demanded be exactly proportional to the change in the price?

(A) pizza and olives
(B) ketchup
(C) laptops
(D) smartphones
(E) laptops and smartphones
159. Which of the following BEST represents an example of how
a price floor can be set?
(A) when France decided to retaliate against Chinese tariffs
by limiting the number of Chinese cars that could be imported
(B) when the United States imposed a retaliatory tax against
Chinese solar panels

(C) when the United States imposed that all Canadian goods
needed to pass another additional health inspection
(D) when the United States imposed that the minimum wage
should be $10 per hour
(E) when France imposed a law that stated that you cannot
charge rent unless you provide minimal living conditions
160. When a government establishes an intervention price and the
price moves below this level,
(A) producer surplus decreases
(B) the demand curve shifts to the right
(C) the supply curve shifts to the left
(D) the equilibrium point shifts to the left
(E) consumer surplus increases
161. If the tomato price increases by 20 percent, and as a result
quantity demanded for lettuce increases by 40 percent, the cross-price
elasticity of demand for tomatoes and lettuce is
(A) 2
(B) 0.5
(C) –2
(D) 0.5
(E) 0
162. Peanut butter and blackberry jam have a cross-price demand
elasticity of –2. The price of peanut butter increases by 20 percent. As

a result, quantity demanded for blackberry jam will
(A) fall 20 percent
(B) fall 40 percent
(C) rise 20 percent
(D) rise 40 percent
(E) remain the same
Use the following graph to answer questions 163 and 164.

163. Which area represents a surplus created by a price floor?
(A) the area below line A and between the supply and demand
curves
(B) the area above line B and between the supply and demand
curves

(C) the area above line A and to the right of the supply curve
(D) the area below line B and to the right of the demand curve
(E) the area above line A and between the supply and demand
curves
164. Which area represents a shortage caused by a price ceiling?
(A) the area underneath line A and between the supply and
demand curves
(B) the area above line B and between the supply and demand
curves
(C) the area above line A and to the right of the supply curve
(D) the area below line B and to the right of the demand curve
(E) the area below line B and between the supply and demand
curves
165. Quantity demanded for pork is 10. The price of chicken
increases 10 percent. If pork and chicken have a cross-price elasticity
of 5, the new quantity demanded for pork will be
(A) 10
(B) 15
(C) 2
(D) 5
(E) 50
166. The price of bread increases by 50 percent. As a result,
quantity demanded for cheese falls 20 percent. The cross-price

elasticity of demand for bread and cheese is
(A) 0.4
(B) –0.4
(C) 2.5
(D) –2.5
(E) 1
167. Cross-price elasticity for corn and wheat is 0.75. The corn
price rises 40 percent. As a result, the new quantity demanded for
wheat is 13. What was quantity demanded for wheat before the corn
price increased?
(A) 16
(B) 17.5
(C) 10
(D) 8
(E) 7.5
168. The price of peaches increases 30 percent. As a result,
quantity demanded for plums increases from 50 to 80. What is the
price elasticity of demand for peaches and plums?
(A) 2
(B) –2
(C) 0.5
(D) –0.5

(E) 1
169. The price of a peach falls from $2 to $1.40. Quantity
supplied for peaches falls from 100 to 85. Price elasticity of supply for
peaches is
(A) –0.5
(B) 2
(C) 0.3
(D) 0.15
(E) 0.5
170. A fashion retailer can easily order new inventory and can
employ inexperienced workers in its stores. A motorcycle
manufacturer must wait several months for part shipments and workers
need training to work at the motorcycle plant. Price elasticity of supply
for the fashion retailer and the motorcycle manufacturer, respectively,
are likely to be
(A) high, high
(B) high, low
(C) low, high
(D) low, low
(E) not enough information provided
171. If the price of a good decreases, the most likely result would
be for the
(A) quantity supplied to increase

(B) quantity supplied to decrease
(C) demand to increase
(D) supply to decrease
(E) demand to decrease
172. If a nation’s income increases by 5 percent and quantity
demanded for sports cars rises by 15 percent, income elasticity of
demand for sports cars is
(A) 3
(B) –3
(C) 0.33
(D) –0.33
(E) 0.5
173. If consumers demand more soda, but health care costs
increase as well, this indicates a
(A) negative externality
(B) price ceiling
(C) price support
(D) price floor
(E) decrease in production costs
174. The number of buyers in a market, consumer tastes, the
availability of substitute goods, and income are known as

(A) factors of supply
(B) determinants of demand
(C) consumer expectations
(D) factors of production
(E) marginal benefits
Refer to the following graph for question 175.

175. What is the price elasticity of supply for apples?
(A) 1
(B) 0.5
(C) 2
(D) 1.5
(E) 7.5

176. German consumers experience a 30 percent income rise.
Quantity demanded for oatmeal falls 15 percent in Germany. Income
elasticity of demand for oatmeal is
(A) 0.3
(B) 0.5
(C) –0.5
(D) 2
(E) –2
177. Income for New York consumers rises 20 percent. Quantity
demanded for heating oil doesn’t change. Heating oil is a
(A) sticky good
(B) inferior good
(C) luxury good
(D) normal good
(E) necessity good
178. The government imposes a $50 tax on television sets. Price
elasticity of supply for television sets is 0.6 and price elasticity of
demand for television sets is –0.2. As a result of the tax increase, a
consumer who buys a television set will pay an additional
(A) $50
(B) $0
(C) $37.50

(D) $25
(E) $12
179. The government places a tariff on imported cars. If price
elasticity of supply for cars is 0.6, and price elasticity of demand for
cars is –0.4, what percentage of the tariff is paid by the car buyer?
(A) 100 percent
(B) 60 percent
(C) 40 percent
(D) 20 percent
(E) 0 percent
Use the following chart to solve questions 180 and 181.

180. What would a change from point B to point A represent?

(A) a shift in the supply curve to the right
(B) an expansion of supply
(C) a shift in the supply curve to the left
(D) a contraction of supply
(E) a change in the Nash equilibrium
181. Which of the following could be a cause of a shift from point
B to point A?
(A) a new technology that changes the field
(B) a lower quantity of the product supplied
(C) a higher quantity of the product supplied
(D) a decrease in the number of sellers
(E) a decrease in taxes
182. The government raises the tax on a truck by $10,000. The
price elasticity of supply for trucks is 1.5 and the price elasticity of
demand is –1.0. Truck manufacturers will absorb costs of
(A) $10,000
(B) $6,000
(C) $4,000
(D) $2,000
(E) $0

183. The government places a tax on bicycle manufacturers.
Bicycle supply is inelastic and demand is elastic. A possible response
by bicycle manufacturers would be
(A) raise bicycle prices
(B) pass the tax hike to bicycle buyers
(C) reduce wages at the bicycle manufacturing plant
(D) reduce bicycle prices
(E) hire more employees
Use the following chart to solve questions 184 and 185.

184. Which of the following could result in a change on the
supply curve from point A to point B?
(A) new technologies being invented that helped production
(B) an increase in the production costs

(C) government subsidies for that product
(D) higher government taxes
(E) a decrease in the price of the product
185. Which of the following could cause a shift in the supply
curve from Point B to Point C?
(A) a decrease in the price of the product
(B) an increase in the price of the product
(C) the government implementing a new tax
(D) a new technology that aids production
(E) a drought that caused difficult conditions for production
186. Tyson Generators operates in a market where there are many
similar products that are not fully identical. The buyers are completely
rational and aware of all of the relevant information. Companies can
easily enter or leave the market, and there are no barriers to entry. Why
is this NOT an example of perfect competition?
(A) because the products are identical in a perfectly
competitive market rather than being similar
(B) Because buyers are not fully rational in a perfectly
competitive market, it is assumed they are price takers.
(C) because buyers are not aware of the relevant information
in a perfectly competitive market, only producers are
(D) because companies are not supposed to ever exit the
market in a perfectly competitive market

(E) because a perfectly competitive market has significant
barriers to entry
187. The price of a product in market C is $150. If the price in
market A is $150, the price in market B is $200, the price in market D
is $90, and the price in market E is $600, which of the following is a
perfectly competitive market based on the price?

(A) only market D is perfectly competitive
(B) markets A and B are perfectly competitive
(C) markets A, B, and E are perfectly competitive
(D) only market C is perfectly competitive
(E) only market E is perfectly competitive

CHAPTER 3
Production, Cost, and the Perfect Competition
Model
Use the following graph to answer question 188.

188. Sections A, B, and C of the short-run and long-run average
cost graph show, respectively,

(A) economies of scale, constant returns to scale, and
diseconomies of scale
(B) economies of scale, diseconomies of scale, and constant
returns to scale
(C) diseconomies of scale, constant returns to scale, and
economies of scale
(D) diseconomies of scale, economies of scale, and constant
returns to scale
(E) constant returns to scale, economies of scale, and
diseconomies of scale
189. A farmer produces soybeans. Which of the following factors
is considered by accounting profit?
(A) the wages the farmer has to pay
(B) the cost of overhead
(C) the cost of fertilizer necessary to produce the soybeans
(D) the cost of the farmer’s gas when he goes to sell his
products
(E) All of the answer choices are correct.
190. The following table shows how many chairs a company can
produce from hiring additional workers. Which worker is responsible
for the largest marginal return?

(A) the first worker
(B) the second worker
(C) the third worker
(D) the fourth worker
(E) the fifth worker
191. Details about the company’s finances are presented in the
following table. What is the company’s accounting profit?

(A) $30,000

(B) $25,000
(C) $21,000
(D) $18,000
(E) $16,500
192. A company has to spend $10,000 on rent every month in
order to produce cars. The company also spends $5,000 to produce
each additional car. Which is the variable cost of producing five cars?
(A) $5,000
(B) $10,000
(C) $15,000
(D) $25,000
(E) $35,000
193. If marginal cost falls in the beginning and then gradually
rises as output increases, you would know that
(A) the law of diminishing returns is valid
(B) MC = MB
(C) this market structure is a perfect competition
(D) this market structure is a monopolistic competition
(E) you would have constant returns to scale
194. All of the following are variable production inputs EXCEPT
(A) the amount of electricity used in a plant

(B) the total amount of raw materials utilized in a plant
(C) human capital
(D) the size of a firm’s labor force
(E) the water bill for a plant
195. If the price of a variable resource increases, the result would
be
(A) a downward shift of MC
(B) an upward shift in AFC
(C) an upward shift in MC
(D) a downward shift in ATC
(E) an upward shift in MP
196. The difference between total revenue and total explicit and
implicit costs is known as
(A) economic profit
(B) accounting profit
(C) total fixed costs
(D) total variable costs
(E) total costs
197. As a result of increased growth, a firm may experience
difficulty in managing larger plants and may lose efficiency. This is
known as

(A) constant returns to scale
(B) explicit costs
(C) law of diminishing marginal returns
(D) diseconomies of scale
(E) economies of scale
198. If the long-run average cost curve is constant over a variety
of plant sizes, this is known as
(A) diseconomies of scale
(B) economies of scale
(C) explicit costs
(D) law of diminishing marginal returns
(E) constant returns to scale
199. Specialization and lower costs of inputs will often result in
(A) a decrease in economic profits
(B) economies of scale
(C) a decrease in implicit costs
(D) constant returns to scale
(E) diseconomies of scale
200. The information about a company’s financial indicators are
provided in the following table. Which of the following is essential for

the company in making decisions about producing the adequate level
of output to maximize profit and whether to continue operating?

(A) By comparing marginal revenue with marginal cost, the
company should continue operating, as the difference is $3.
(B) By comparing total revenue and total costs, the company
should continue operating, as the difference is $28,000.
(C) By viewing the debt-to-equity ratio, the company should
continue operating, as it is below 1.
(D) By comparing variable and total costs, the company
should stop operating, as its variable costs are too high when
compared with total costs.
(E) By comparing variable costs with total revenue, the
company should stop operating, as it barely has enough profit to
cover total and variable costs.
201. Mr. Ray is a business owner of a competitive firm. He is
trying to decide whether to shut down his firm in the short run. Which
factors should Mr. Ray analyze to help in his decision?
(A) average variable cost and marginal revenue

(B) total revenue and total cost
(C) total fixed cost and total revenue
(D) price and average total cost
(E) price and marginal benefit
202. In a perfect competition, if P > ATC, which of the following
will take place in the long run?
(A) Price decreases as more firms exit the market.
(B) Price decreases as more firms enter the market.
(C) Price increases as more firms enter the market.
(D) Profits decrease as price increases.
(E) none of the above
203. If prices fall below AVC, a company should
(A) differentiate products
(B) raise prices
(C) cut TFC
(D) lay off workers
(E) shut down
204. The profit-maximizing rule states that to maximize profits a
firm should produce where
(A) MR = MC
(B) MR > MC

(C) MR < MC
(D) MB > MC
(E) MB = MC
205. When there is zero incentive for more firms to enter a
perfectly competitive market, it is said that the market has reached
(A) constant returns to scale
(B) economies of scale
(C) diseconomies of scale
(D) long-run equilibrium
(E) none of the above
206. If new firms enter the market, what is most likely to occur?
(A) Total revenue will decrease.
(B) Total revenue will increase.
(C) Market power increases.
(D) Market power decreases.
(E) none of the above
207. A perfect competition refers to
(A) the most competitive market structure
(B) the least competitive market structure
(C) extensive economies of scale and higher cost-efficiency
when there is only one firm for the entire demand of a product

(D) a few small firms offering a differentiated product with
easy entry into the market
(E) a market structure with a small number of interdependent
large firms producing a standardized product
208. Kronhorst Inc. has a marginal revenue of $2,000, while its
average variable costs are $1,500. The company has roughly $1,800
depreciation of its office annually. How much would the average
variable costs have to be in order for the company to decide to shut
down operations?
(A) $300
(B) $500
(C) $1,500
(D) $1,800
(E) $2,000
209. What is the most likely reason perfectly competitive firms do
not make a profit in the long run?
(A) barriers of exit from the market
(B) the product being standardized with little differentiation
(C) the arrival of new firms on the market
(D) the firms being “price takers”
(E) all of the above
210. If firms are exiting a market and price is rising as a result,
then

(A) there is a consumer shortage
(B) the market structure is a monopolistic competition
(C) P < ATC in a perfect competition
(D) P > ATC in a perfect competition
(E) P = ATC in a perfect competition
211. The key difference between accounting profit and economic
profit is
(A) accounting profit includes the opportunity cost of capital
(B) economic profit includes the opportunity cost of capital
(C) economic profit is a key component of GDP
(D) economic profit is usually higher than accounting profit
(E) accounting profit is always higher than economic profit
Use the following graph to answer questions 212 and 213.

212. The diagram represents which type of market structure?
(A) monopolistic competition
(B) perfect competition
(C) natural monopoly
(D) monopoly
(E) oligopoly
213. At which point is the graph showing profit maximization?
(A) MR = MC
(B) AC = P
(C) MC = AC
(D) the area between MC and AC

(E) There is no point at which it shows profit maximization.
214. Which of the following shows the profit-maximizing point
for all types of market structures?
(A) P < MC
(B) P = MC
(C) P = ATC
(D) P = MR
(E) MR = MC
215. How is monopolistic competition similar to perfect
competition?
(A) It is easy for producers to enter and exit the market.
(B) There is only one producer in both market structures.
(C) No money is spent on advertising in either market
structures.
(D) Companies are completely price takers in both scenarios.
(E) It is possible for the price to be more than the company’s
break-even cost in the long run.
216. If economic profit is zero, then
(A) a firm earned a normal profit
(B) a firm did not earn an accounting profit
(C) a firm has reached its shutdown point in the short run

(D) a firm has reached its shutdown point in the long run
(E) a firm must lobby the government for assistance in
subsidies
217. The freedom of entry and exit for a perfectly competitive
market guarantees
(A) each firm knows how each other is planning its
production
(B) no cheating on a firm’s part to produce an additional unit
of output
(C) economic profits will be zero in the long run
(D) economic profits will be greater than accounting profits
(E) economic profits will exceed marginal revenue
218. Producing to where MR = MC in a perfectly competitive
market ensures
(A) the government will not intervene with regulations
(B) the ease of entry and exit in the market
(C) product differentiation
(D) earning an economic profit in the long run
(E) production efficiency in the long run
219. If a firm bases its decisions of pricing and production on the
actions of other firms, then it is most likely a(n)
(A) monopolistic competition

(B) natural monopoly
(C) monopoly
(D) perfect competition
(E) oligopoly
220. A cartel will maximize profit when
(A) MC = MR
(B) MC < MR
(C) MC > MR
(D) W = MPR
(E) none of the above
221. The significant purpose of a “barrier to entry” in a market is
(A) helping monopolies earn economic profit in the long run
(B) restricting the creation of a cartel
(C) restricting price discrimination
(D) allowing monopolistic competitive firms to differentiate
their product
(E) restricting collusive pricing practices
222. Long-run profits for the perfectly competitive firm will
always be
(A) greater than the marginal cost
(B) normal

(C) negative
(D) positive
(E) none of the above
223. Which of the following BEST reflects the example of an
economy of scale?
(A) when a company receives diminishing returns for new
workers that it employs
(B) when a company is not able to get consumers to buy its
products
(C) when a company becomes more effective in decreasing
unit production costs as it grows
(D) when a larger company takes over a smaller company by
purchasing its shares
(E) when a company receives a larger government subsidy
than a smaller producer
224. Imagine a perfectly competitive market. If the market price
of the product is $15 and the marginal cost is also $15, which of the
following is true?
(A) The firm is making zero profit.
(B) Many firms will soon leave the market.
(C) Many firms will join together to increase profit through
collusive pricing.
(D) The firm is profit maximizing.
(E) all of the above

225. For a perfectly competitive market, the best way to
maximize profit is
(A) MR = MC
(B) MRP < W
(C) AFC = MB
(D) MC > MB
(E) none of the above
226. A tire factory buys rubber to make tires. The price of rubber
declines. As a result,
(A) marginal cost decreases
(B) fixed cost decreases
(C) average total cost increases
(D) average fixed cost decreases
(E) fixed cost increases
227. Joe resigned from his engineering job, where he earned
$50,000, to open a restaurant. He earns a profit of $40,000 as the
restaurant owner. As the restaurant owner, Joe earns
(A) a normal profit
(B) an economic profit
(C) an accounting profit
(D) an abnormal profit

(E) both B and C
228. Jeff opens a shoe store. He earns $50,000 in the first year,
but his profit falls to $30,000 in the second year after more shoe stores
open up in town. He would earn $30,000 if he worked for another firm
as an employee. In the second year, the shoe store has reached
(A) economic profit
(B) short-run equilibrium
(C) long-run equilibrium
(D) market surplus
(E) deadweight loss
229. A furniture company opens up a plant and earns a profit of
$50,000 from the plant. After it opens up a second plant, doubling
production quantity, the first and second plants each earn the furniture
company $60,000 in profit. The furniture company achieved
(A) diseconomies of scale
(B) economies of scale
(C) diminishing marginal returns
(D) a monopoly
(E) perfect competition
230. An auto manufacturer earns a profit of $100,000 from its
plant. It opens up second and third plants, tripling production quantity,
and profit rises to $300,000. This indicates
(A) economies of scale

(B) diseconomies of scale
(C) constant returns to scale
(D) diminishing marginal returns
(E) monopolistic competition
231. Competition in a market system best helps a society because
(A) supply and demand establish the best price for a good or
service
(B) all opportunity costs are heavily analyzed
(C) the total welfare is increased
(D) aggregate supply and aggregate demand are balanced
(E) within the production possibilities frontier, all resources
are maximized and used efficiently
232. An auto parts manufacturer starts buying large quantities of
steel, reducing its variable cost per unit. It also begins to specialize in
car door production instead of manufacturing every part of the car. As
a result, production increases and average cost decreases. The auto
parts manufacturer achieved
(A) economies of scale
(B) diseconomies of scale
(C) short-run equilibrium
(D) declining returns to scale
(E) constant returns to scale

233. Bill leaves his job as a lawyer to open up a clothing store. He
earned $100,000 as a lawyer and earns $120,000 as owner of the
clothing store. His economic profit is
(A) $120,000
(B) $100,000
(C) $20,000
(D) $0
(E) $220,000
234. Nate opens up a restaurant and earns a profit of $60,000 per
year. He is offered a job as a factory manager paying $80,000 per year.
His economic profit is
(A) –$20,000
(B) $80,000
(C) –$80,000
(D) $0
(E) $140,000
235. Company A is having trouble integrating a larger number of
plants so that it can be profitable. As the company expanded, its third
plant was very profitable and the company managed to significantly
cut down their per-unit costs. The company fired its lean management
operator, and when it opened its fourth plant, per-unit costs increased
significantly. This trend persisted as the company opened its fifth plant
and per-unit production costs continued to increase. This is an example
of
(A) a Nash equilibrium

(B) the law of supply and demand
(C) diseconomies of scale
(D) the economy of scale
(E) a consistent return to scale
236. If P < ATC in a market with perfect competition,
(A) firms will exit the market and the price will rise
(B) high exit barriers will prevent firms from leaving and the
price will not change
(C) low entry barriers allow new firms to enter the market and
the price will fall
(D) firms will not enter or exit the market because it is at
long-run equilibrium
(E) none of the above
237. In a small rural town in Brazil, the local government is the
only employer of teachers. Assume that teachers are not able to work
online or start their own governments, and they are only able to work
for schools within their district. This would be an example of
(A) a monopoly
(B) a perfectly competitive market
(C) an oligopoly
(D) a monopsony
(E) a cartel

238. An automaker is willing to sell a car for $30,000. A
consumer is willing to buy a car for $50,000. The equilibrium price for
cars in the market is $40,000. Producer surplus is
(A) $30,000
(B) $20,000
(C) $40,000
(D) $10,000
(E) $50,000
239. A banana farm will sell a banana for $2. A consumer will
pay $2.60 for the banana. The market price of a banana is $2.25.
Consumer surplus is
(A) $2.00
(B) $2.25
(C) $2.60
(D) $0.25
(E) $0.35
240. A raspberry farm is selling boxes of raspberries. At the
current output level, a box has a marginal cost of $4. Marginal cost
would equal marginal revenue at $5. At this output level, a box of
raspberries would sell for $6 on the market. The raspberry farm should
(A) increase raspberry output until marginal cost is $5
(B) increase raspberry output until marginal cost is $6
(C) shut down

(D) keep raspberry output the same
(E) lower raspberry output
241. Teran is a wine manufacturer in California. The company is
experiencing a troubling increase in its marginal costs that may
endanger its operations. What actions could the company take to BEST
decrease marginal costs in the long run?
(A) The company should hire a larger number of employees.
(B) The company should acquire its largest domestic
competitor.
(C) The company should focus on training its employees so
they specialize in a certain area.
(D) The company should request a lump-sum subsidy from
the local government.
(E) The company should fire at least a fourth of its
employees.
242. The information in the following table show many video
games Tanaka Co. can produce, given a certain level of financial
investment. What is this an example of ?

(A) the law of diminishing returns

(B) market equilibrium
(C) Nash equilibrium
(D) an economy of scale
(E) a consistent return to scale
243. A wine manufacturing company operates in a state where it
has
a consistent return to scale. Given the following information,
the value of X should be replaced with?

(A) 2
(B) 14
(C) 14.4
(D) 15
(E) 16.2
244. The profit of a monopolist by selling at a monopolist price is
$1,500,000 in market A. Market B is an oligopoly with the same
conditions, aside from the number of companies, where the companies
that operate in a cartel earn $1,100,000. If the same market operated
under the rules of a perfectly competitive market, called market C, the

companies would earn $300,000. What are the deadweight costs for
each market?
(A) The deadweight costs are $1,500,000 for market A,
$1,100,000 for market B, and $300,000 for market C.
(B) The deadweight costs are $400,000 for market A,
$800,000 for market B, and 0 for market C.
(C) The deadweight costs are $1,100,000 for both markets A
and B, while the deadweight costs for C are not known, as there is
no valid reference point.
(D) The deadweight costs are $1,200,000 for market A,
$800,000 for market B, and 0 for market C.
(E) The deadweight costs for markets A, B, and C are 0, as
they are all operating under different market structures.
245. Which of the following BEST defines the minimum efficient
scale?
(A) It is the lowest point on the cost curve where a company
can produce its product at a competitive price.
(B) It is the points on the production curve where a
monopolist can no longer achieve higher-than-expected returns.
(C) It is the points on the cost curve where a producer no
longer gains higher returns by including additional production
capacity or capital.
(D) It is the level where producers can no longer earn any
kind of profit and should exit the market.
(E) It is the level where producers can no longer earn
accounting profit and should find ways to cut down costs.

246. The levels of output for a company are shown in the
following table. If the company wants to maximize profits and it costs
the company $1,500,000 to open a plant, while the company can sell
each of its products for $20,000, what is the number of plants where
the company maximizes its profit?

(A) one production plant
(B) two production plants
(C) three production plants
(D) four production plants
(E) five production plants
247. What will happen to the marginal cost curve in case of the
law of diminishing returns?
(A) It will be downward sloping.
(B) It will be upward sloping.
(C) It will cause a shift in the marginal cost curve to the right.
(D) It will make the cost curve a horizontal line.

(E) It will make the cost curve a vertical line.
248. The financial information about Torson’s Toys is provided in
the following table. The company earns $20 for each manufactured
toy, while the cost of hiring an additional employee is $800. What is
the least amount of profit that the company can make if it selects the
number of workers that will bring it the LEAST possible profit?

(A) $1,300
(B) $800
(C) $600
(D) $200
(E) $4,800
249. Mera Inc. operates in a market that can best be described as
perfectly competitive. Which of the following conditions can it
expect?
(A) There will be high barriers to entry.
(B) There will be no economic profit in the long run.

(C) The market will not be effective in the long run.
(D) The price in the long run will be determined only by
total costs – marginal revenue.
(E) There is one company that gains control of the market in
the long run.
250. The following table shows how many tables a small
company can produce. Which of the following should be the value of
X in order for this to BEST illustrate the law of diminishing returns?

(A) 12
(B) 15
(C) 17
(D) 18
(E) 19
251. The financial data for a small company called Peterson and
Associates is shown in the following table. What is the economic
profit of the company?

(A) $19,000
(B) $30,000
(C) $35,000
(D) $36,000
(E) $45,000
252. Market A is characterized by low costs of entry, where
companies are unable to earn an economic profit in the long term.
Market B is one in which there are a few companies that work together
to set the market price and which causes consumers to purchase
products at a higher cost. How can these two markets be classified?
(A) Both markets A and B are an oligopoly.
(B) Both markets A and B are an example of monopolistic
competition.
(C) Market A is an example of a monopsony, while market B
is an example of a monopolistic competition.

(D) Market A is an example of an oligopoly, while market B
is an example of monopolistic competition.
(E) Market A is an example of perfect competition, while
market B is an example of oligopoly.
253. The following table shows the price and quantity for several
different markets of table manufacturers. Which of the following
would MOST likely be an example of perfect competition?

(A) Market A
(B) Market B
(C) Market C
(D) Market D
(E) Market E
254. Mavericks International is considering whether it should
remain in business. Which of the following is accurate in how the
company should make its decision?
(A) It will only consider its accounting profit.
(B) It will consider both its accounting profit and total costs.

(C) It will primarily consider whether it is making an
economic profit or loss.
(D) It will look at the total costs it has, regardless of revenue.
(E) It will consider its variable costs, regardless of revenue.
255. Which of the following is a structure where companies are
price takers?
(A) a monopsony
(B) a cartel
(C) an oligopoly
(D) a perfectly competitive market
(E) a monopolistic market
256. The information for the long-term financial indicators of a
company competing in several different types of market structures is
provided in the following table. Which of the following markets is
MOST likely a perfectly competitive market?

(A) Market A
(B) Market B

(C) Market C
(D) Market D
(E) Market E
257. Companies A, B, and C are the only companies participating
in a perfectly competitive market. Which of the following actions is
NOT possible in such market conditions?
(A) for companies A and B to produce a better product,
causing company C to decide to leave the market in the long term
(B) for company D to see that there is enough profit to be
made in entering the market and competing with these companies
(C) for companies A, B, and C to work together to keep the
price higher than it would be in fair market conditions
(D) for companies A, B, and C to all eventually leave the
market as several larger companies entered with stronger products
(E) All of the answer choices are possible in a perfectly
competitive market.
258. The financial details for Darian Corporation are shown in the
following table. Given the financial indicators provided, what is the
economic profit of the company?

(A) $18,000
(B) $34,000
(C) $36,000
(D) $40,500
(E) $41,500
259. The financial details for Korean Oil Incorporated are shown
in the following table. What is the value of the difference between the
economic profit of the company and the accounting profit of the
company?

(A) Economic profit if $1,500 higher than accounting profit.
(B) Economic profit is $2,500 lower than accounting profit.
(C) The economic profit is equal to accounting profit in this
example.
(D) Economic profit is $3,500 lower than accounting profit.
(E) Economic profit $6,000 lower than accounting profit.
260. Through the use of a lean management structure, Toyota
could cut down per-unit costs by expanding its operations. Toyota
continued to grow; it understood that by including more product lines,
it could further decrease per-unit costs. At one point, there weren’t
sufficient employees to operate the production line, and the company’s
per-unit costs significantly increased as it opened a new plant. This is
an example of
(A) overcrowding and mismanagement of resources that
turned an economy of scale into a decreasing return to scale
(B) overcrowding of manufacturing lines that caused a
constant return to scale to shift to an economy of scale

(C) ineffective use of resources that caused a diseconomy of
scale to be replaced with a decreasing return to scale
(D) bad inventory management that caused an ineffective
scale to become effective
(E) a change in the market equilibrium that was caused by a
negative externality over which the company had no control
Use the following table to solve questions 261 and 262.

261. Jim has recently opened a restaurant. The price of his
marketing efforts is one-third of all of his labor costs. What is the
value of marketing costs labeled as X?
(A) $6,666.67
(B) $7,500
(C) $8,000

(D) $1,333.33
(E) $12,000
262. Using the information from the table and from the previous
question, what are Jim’s accounting profits?
(A) $25,000
(B) $32,000
(C) $33,000
(D) $35,666.67
(E) $43,666.67
263. Mark’s company produces grapes. While Mark has many
competitors, there is only one large company that manufactures wines
to which Mark can sell his product. Selling grapes directly to
consumers wouldn’t be profitable, so Mark can only sell to the wine
manufacturer. What is this an example of ?
(A) a monopsony
(B) a monopoly
(C) an oligopoly
(D) a cartel
(E) a perfectly competitive market
264. An apple farm is engaged in perfect competition with other
apple farms that sell the same cultivar. To earn an economic profit, the
apple farm should
(A) raise the price of its apples

(B) reduce the price of its apples to gain market share
(C) sell a unique apple cultivar
(D) produce apples until MC = MR
(E) hire more employees
265. In a market for microwave ovens, the equation for quantity
supplied is
P = 10 + 4(Q) and the equation for quantity demanded is P = 80 –
3(Q). What is the equilibrium microwave oven price and quantity?
(A) 80, 420
(B) 50, 90
(C) 80, 90
(D) 50, 10
(E) 80, 130
266. In a market for blenders, the equation for quantity supplied is
P = 80 + 6(Q) and the equation for quantity demanded is 400 – 10(Q).
What is the equilibrium blender price and quantity?
(A) 20, 420
(B) 200, 20
(C) 140, 15
(D) 20, 160
(E) 480, 60

267. Bread becomes less popular with consumers who want
wheat-free diets. Meanwhile, a flood damages wheat crops, so less
wheat is available for making bread. As a result,
(A) the market price of bread will increase
(B) the market price of bread will decrease
(C) equilibrium quantity for bread will increase
(D) equilibrium quantity for bread will decrease
(E) equilibrium quantity for bread will not change
268. The price of steel, an input for car manufacturing, falls. At
the same time, fewer consumers can afford to buy cars because of a
weak economy. As a result,
(A) the market price of cars will increase
(B) the market price of cars will decrease
(C) equilibrium quantity for cars will increase
(D) equilibrium quantity for cars will decrease
(E) the market price of cars will not change
269. In a market for vacuum cleaners, the equation for quantity
supplied is P = 575 + 8(Q) and the equation for quantity demanded is
920 – 15(Q). What is the equilibrium vacuum cleaner price and
quantity, respectively?
(A) 345, 23
(B) 575, 23
(C) 695, 15

(D) 1095, 10
(E) 1200, 8
270. In a market for refrigerators, the equation for quantity
supplied is 1,000 + 3(Q) and the equation for quantity demanded is
5,000 – 5(Q). What is the equilibrium refrigerator price and quantity,
respectively?
(A) 1,150, 50
(B) 1,150, 4,000
(C) 4,000, 8
(D) 4,000, 400
(E) 400, 4,000
271. The equilibrium price of apples would decrease if the supply
and demand curves for apples shifted, respectively, to the
(A) right, left
(B) left, right
(C) left, left
(D) right, right
(E) none of the above
272. The equilibrium quantity of pears would increase if the
supply and demand curves for pears shifted, respectively, to the
(A) right, left
(B) left, right

(C) left, left
(D) right, right
(E) none of the above
273. If the government established an effective price floor for
grapes,
(A) quantity supplied would be more than quantity demanded
(B) quantity demanded would be more than quantity supplied
(C) quantity supplied would be equal to quantity demanded
(D) quantity supplied would be less than quantity demanded
(E) none of the above
274. A computer manufacturer needs $50,000 to pay for its
factories. The company also needs to pay $15,000 for the lease on the
manufacturing equipment it uses. The company needs to spend an
additional $500 on parts and $250 on labor for each new computer
produced. If the company produced 100 new computers in March,
which of the following is accurate?
(A) The company’s fixed costs for March are $50,000, while
variable costs are $15,750.
(B) The company’s fixed costs for March are $65,000, while
total costs are $140,000.
(C) The company’s variable costs are equal to its total costs
and are $140,000.
(D) The company’s fixed costs are $70,000, while the cost of
labor is the only variable cost.

(E) The company’s variable cost is $750, while the fixed costs
are $65,000.
275. Zagreb International operates in a market where it works
with several other companies to set the market price which prevents an
effective market structure. On the other hand, GTI International
operates in a market where many companies of a similar size produce
computer chips. However, there is only one producer of computers that
purchases these computer chips. How can these markets be compared?
(A) Zagreb operates in a perfect competition, while GTI
operates in a monopoly.
(B) Both Zagreb and GTI operate in an oligopoly, but there is
a larger number of sellers in GTI’s market.
(C) Zagreb operates in a monopolistic competition, while GTI
operates in a perfectly competitive market.
(D) Zagreb operates in a company that is an oligopoly, while
GTI operates in a monopsony.
(E) Zagreb is an example of a monopoly, while GTI operates
in a natural monopoly.
276. Floyd Pharmaceuticals has revenue of $450,000. The total
costs of the company are $200,000. If it takes the company only 0.1
percent of its total costs to obtain the value of an additional unit of its
signature vaccine sold, what is the company’s marginal revenue and
why?
(A) $250,000, as this is the difference between revenue and
total costs.
(B) $450,000, as this is how much the company earns every
year.

(C) $2,000, as this is how much the company could make per
unit if it was more effective in cutting down costs.
(D) $4,500, as this is the price of how much one employee
can produce.
(E) $200, as this is how much the company can earn from an
additional unit of vaccine.

CHAPTER 4
Imperfect Competition
277. Product differentiation is an essential part of which type of
market structure?
(A) oligopoly
(B) monopoly
(C) monopolistic competition
(D) natural monopoly
(E) perfect competition
278. A firm with a natural monopoly may be required by law to
set prices either on or relatively close to the costs that the firm incurred
to make the good or service. This idea is known as
(A) the average cost pricing rule
(B) the ability to pay rule
(C) an antitrust law
(D) law of diminishing marginal returns
(E) economies of scale

279. A monopolistic competition refers to
(A) extensive economies of scale and higher cost-efficiency
when there is only one firm for the entire demand of a product
(B) many small firms offering a differentiated product with
easy entry into the market
(C) a market structure with a small number of interdependent
large firms producing a standardized product
(D) the most competitive market structure
(E) the least competitive market structure
280. An oligopoly refers to
(A) a single firm offering the product and achieving
economies of scale
(B) the market structure where a firm has the most pricing
power
(C) a small number of interdependent firms, high barriers to
entry, and significant pricing power
(D) many small firms offering a differentiated product with
easy entry into the market
(E) the market structure where a firm has the least pricing
power
281. All of the following are part of a monopolistic competition
market structure EXCEPT
(A) differentiated products
(B) deadweight loss

(C) economic profits in the short run
(D) economic profits in the long run
(E) many firms
282. A movie theater offers tickets to the general public for $10.
Students can buy tickets for $8. This is an example of
(A) deadweight loss
(B) variable costs
(C) price discrimination
(D) market power
(E) fixed costs
283. A monopoly refers to
(A) the least competitive market structure
(B) the most competitive market structure
(C) a market structure with a small number of interdependent
large firms producing a standardized product
(D) extensive economies of scale and higher cost-efficiency
when there is only one firm for the entire demand of a product
(E) the most competitive market structure
284. Which of the following BEST reflects an example of an
oligopoly?
(A) when there is only one company that is free to set the
market price

(B) when there are two to three companies competing against
each other, causing a very low price
(C) when a company gets a patent and is legally the only
company that can fulfill a certain service
(D) when there are many small companies competing against
one another, keeping the price high
(E) when there are a few companies who work together to
maintain a higher market price
285. A company recently found a vaccine, and it now has a patent
for it for 10 years. Why is this an example of a natural monopoly?
(A) because the company will allow other companies to
produce it as well immediately, making the monopoly legal
(B) because there is only one company on the market and it
achieved this through non-market means
(C) because the company will be incentivized to provide a
very low price
(D) because there is only one company in the market, but the
company achieved this through regular market means
(E) because the company receives financial incentives from
the government whenever it gets a patent
286. Why is the demand for fruit less price elastic than the
demand for a boat?
(A) Consumption of fruit is greater.
(B) A boat is an inferior good.
(C) There are more suppliers of fruit than boat manufacturers.

(D) Fruit takes up less of a consumer’s budget.
(E) all of the above
287. All of the following are long-run production decisions
EXCEPT
(A) an auto-repair shop decides to increase the size of its
garage
(B) a school decides to hire more teaching assistants because
of an increase in the school population
(C) a firm increases the number of its plants
(D) a school decides to add more classrooms and a new
performing arts center
(E) a firm decides to close 5 percent of its plants
288. The difference between a monopoly and a monopolistic
competition is
(A) differentiated products
(B) economies of scale
(C) long-term pricing power
(D) government regulation
(E) the size of the market
289. If a monopoly and a perfect competition have the same costs,
the monopoly will always
(A) charge a lesser price than the perfect competition

(B) produce the same quantity as the perfect competition
(C) charge a higher price than the perfect competition and
produce less
(D) charge a higher price than the perfect competition and
produce more
(E) none of the above
290. No barriers to entry or exit, many firms, and a standardized
product are characteristics of which type of market structure?
(A) monopolistic competition
(B) oligopoly
(C) natural monopoly
(D) monopoly
(E) perfect competition
291. The market for smartphones may be considered a
monopolistic competition rather than a perfect competition because
(A) there is product differentiation
(B) there is no product differentiation
(C) profits in the long run decrease as more firms enter the
market
(D) they are price takers
(E) all of the above

292. The services of natural gas, water, and electricity brought
into the household are best consigned to which market structure?
(A) monopolistic competition
(B) oligopoly
(C) perfect competition
(D) natural monopoly
(E) monopoly
293. If the price of cigarettes, a normal good, is in equilibrium,
which choice will result in a price increase for cigarettes?
(A) consumer income to decrease
(B) consumer expectations to remain the same
(C) the price of tobacco to increase
(D) the government to decrease regulations
(E) the price of tobacco to decrease
294. Which of the following is a trait of monopolistic
competition?
(A) a market where all of the products are the same
(B) a market where there is only one producer
(C) companies in that market do not maintain shared capacity
(D) a market where companies make more than normal profit
in the long run

(E) a market where there are few barriers to entry
295. Which pricing and output choices would a monopolist
select?
(A) Output should be MR = MC and P > MC.
(B) Output should be MR = MC and P = MC.
(C) Output should be MR > MC and P > MC.
(D) Output should be MR < MC and P > MC.
(E) Output should be MR = MC and P < TRC.
296. Which market structures have ease of entry and exit in the
long run?
(A) perfect competition and monopoly
(B) perfect competition and monopolistic competition
(C) monopolistic competition and oligopoly
(D) oligopoly and natural monopoly
(E) all market structures
297. The government is needed to step in and regulate an electric
natural monopoly. Which of the following actions will ensure
allocative efficiency?
(A) Regulate the natural monopoly to the point where P <
MC.
(B) Regulate the natural monopoly to the point where P >
MC.

(C) Regulate the natural monopoly to the point where P =
MC.
(D) Regulate the natural monopoly to the point where P >
TFC.
(E) none of the above
298. An airline may identify a specific group of people and
charge them a different rate. This is known as
(A) a monopolistic competition
(B) price discrimination
(C) diseconomies of scale
(D) constant returns to scale
(E) illegal by current federal laws
299. Price discrimination might be successful if
(A) the firm can prevent resale to other consumers and
identify and separate groups of consumers
(B) the firm does not have a monopoly on the pricing power
of the good or service
(C) the firm has a monopoly on pricing power but cannot
prevent resale to other consumers
(D) the firm does not have economies of scale
(E) the firm is operating within government regulations
300. Suppose you pick up the latest edition of The Economist and
read that company Z, a producer of cigarettes, recently purchased 8 out

of the 10 biggest farms that produce tobacco. Since you are a very
good AP Economics student, you realize immediately that company Z
is attempting to
(A) increase profits
(B) establish an oligopoly through collusive pricing
(C) maximize profits where marginal revenue equals marginal
cost
(D) establish a monopoly through majority control of a factor
of production
(E) none of the above
Use the following graph to answer question 301.

301. The graph represents a short-run monopolistic equilibrium.
The shaded area represents
(A) surplus
(B) shortage
(C) profit
(D) price ceiling
(E) price floor
302. In the long run, monopolistically competitive firms break
even because of
(A) government regulations
(B) price ceilings
(C) no entry or exit barriers
(D) exit of firms from the market
(E) non-price competition
303. Game theory fits best with which market structure?
(A) monopolistic competition
(B) perfect competition
(C) monopoly
(D) oligopoly
(E) natural monopoly

304. Price leadership fits best with which type of market
structure?
(A) monopoly
(B) natural monopoly
(C) perfect competition
(D) oligopoly
(E) monopolistic competition
305. Implicit costs are
(A) direct, purchased, out-of-pocket costs
(B) costs that change with the level of output
(C) indirect costs or opportunity costs
(D) total variable costs divided by output
(E) none of the above
306. If a cartel comes into existence, the most likely outcome
would be that
(A) economic profits will be balanced among all cartel
members
(B) each cartel member would attempt to cheat by producing
more
(C) there is allocative efficiency
(D) prices will be established through the market forces of
supply and demand

(E) advertising will push consumers to one firm or the other
307. Monopoly deadweight loss is caused by
(A) P > MC
(B) P = MC
(C) MC = MB
(D) MC > MB
(E) none of the above
308. If price equals marginal revenue, which equals marginal
cost, which equals average total cost, all in the long run, which type of
market structure would this be?
(A) monopolistic competition
(B) monopoly
(C) natural monopoly
(D) oligopoly
(E) perfect competition
309. All of the following are characteristic of an oligopoly
EXCEPT
(A) price taking
(B) collusive behavior
(C) barriers to entry
(D) cheating on other firm members to produce more

(E) a few large firms
310. Jet Inc. is a car-making company that operates in a market
that has a very inelastic demand curve. Barriers to entering the market
are high, and the price is higher than the marginal cost in the long run.
Which of the following is this most likely an example of ?
(A) monopolistic competition
(B) perfect competition
(C) both A and B
(D) imperfect competition
(E) an atomistic market
Use the following graph to answer question 311.

311. For the firm in this graph, marginal revenue is
(A) constantly decreasing
(B) constantly increasing
(C) the same at every output level
(D) increasing rapidly, then decreasing, then negative
(E) increasing at a constant rate, then decreasing
312. If P = ATC, then
(A) economic profit is zero
(B) accounting profit is zero

(C) normal profit is unattainable
(D) firms are operating inefficiently
(E) all of the above
313. Since the monopolist has many barriers to entry and no
competition, he or she has price-setting ability. This is also known as
(A) purchasing power
(B) profit maximization
(C) market power
(D) efficiency
(E) none of the above
314. Firms engaged in a monopolistically competitive market
have some market power because
(A) the firms have few competitors
(B) the firms have differentiated products
(C) the government restricts the use of patents for the firms
through antitrust legislation
(D) advertising allows the firms to set any price they wish
(E) none of the above
315. When the government grants a patent to a firm, the market
for the patented product becomes a(n)
(A) monopoly

(B) oligopoly
(C) cartel
(D) monopolistic competition
(E) pure competition
316. Economies of scale refers to
(A) an increase in ATC as quantity increases
(B) a decrease in ATC as quantity increases
(C) a decrease in ATC as quantity decreases
(D) a firm maximizing profit through dominance of the
market
(E) sensitivity to the determinants of supply and demand and
price level
Refer to the following graph, which reflects the market for a soda
manufacturer, to answer questions 317–319.

317. What is the soda manufacturer’s economic profit if it has a
monopoly?
(A) $800
(B) $1,000
(C) $400
(D) $600
(E) $0
318. Which areas on the chart reflect the deadweight loss caused
by the monopoly?
(A) the triangle bounded by points A, B, and (200, $2)
(B) the triangle bounded by points A, B, and (200, $2) AND
the triangle bounded by point B, ($2, 200), and the point where
MR = MC

(C) the rectangle containing point A and (0, $2)
(D) the rectangle containing point A and (0, $0)
(E) the triangle containing the area between D and MR but
above MC
319. If the soda price and quantity shifted from point A to point
B, this would indicate
(A) demand for soda increased
(B) economies of scale
(C) other soda manufacturers entered the market
(D) decreased price competition
(E) diseconomies of scale
320. A few laptop manufacturers are competing in a market. The
laptops have slightly different styles and similar prices. The laptop
manufacturers earn economic profits in the long run. The market is
a(n)
(A) oligopoly
(B) monopoly
(C) perfect competition
(D) monopolistic competition
(E) none of the above
321. Several oil companies form an industry organization that sets
the price of a barrel of oil. This is NOT

(A) a monopoly
(B) a cartel
(C) collusion
(D) an oligopoly
(E) market power
322. An agricultural community has four banana farms, five plum
farms, six grape farms, and seven apple farms. Demand is likely the
MOST price elastic for which fruit?
(A) apples
(B) bananas
(C) plums
(D) grapes
(E) not enough information
323. Many farms are selling peanuts. The peanuts are not
differentiated and the peanut farms are not earning an economic profit.
Demand for a peanut farm is likely
(A) elastic
(B) perfectly elastic
(C) inelastic
(D) perfectly inelastic
(E) downward sloping

324. An auto manufacturer needs to reduce costs in the short run.
It can make any of these decisions EXCEPT
(A) lay off 10 percent of the auto workers
(B) shut down 5 percent of its plants
(C) order smaller quantities of metal and rubber
(D) shut down a production line
(E) refinance corporate bonds
325. A price increase in product B resulted in a price increase for
product C. Product C is most likely a(n)
(A) inferior good
(B) complementary good
(C) normal good
(D) substitute good
(E) factor of production
326. A toy manufacturer adds an employee and average cost
decreases. It continues to add more employees. At first, average cost
decreases even further, but with even more employees average cost
begins to rise. This reflects
(A) economies of scale
(B) diseconomies of scale
(C) constant economies of scale
(D) the U-shaped average cost curve

(E) new firms entering the market
327. A group of truck manufacturers are competing in a market.
The trucks they manufacture are differentiated products. If this market
is an oligopoly and NOT a monopolistic competition,
(A) truck manufacturers must consider other firms’ responses
when making business decisions
(B) the trucks would not be differentiated
(C) there would be many truck manufacturers
(D) truck manufacturers would have no incentive to collude
(E) truck manufacturers would have market power
328. An auto parts manufacturer has fixed costs of $40,000. It can
shut down or produce tires at a loss of $10,000. If it decides to produce
tires, its economic profit is
(A) –$10,000
(B) $40,000
(C) $30,000
(D) $50,000
(E) –$30,000
329. Four cable companies have 90 percent market share. These
firms may be
(A) price takers
(B) in collusion

(C) in perfect competition
(D) unconcerned with other cable companies’ pricing
strategies
(E) earning a normal profit in the long run
330. Many small potato farms are growing potatoes. Three large
French fry manufacturers are buying all of the potatoes. The potato
market is best described as
(A) perfect competition
(B) an oligopoly
(C) an oligopsony
(D) a monopsony
(E) monopolistic competition
331. When a steel manufacturer is buying all of the iron ore
produced by many mines, it is likely
(A) a price taker
(B) a monopsony
(C) not insulated from supply and demand fluctuations
(D) at a negotiating disadvantage to suppliers
(E) engaged in perfect competition
332. A movie studio charges $8 to watch one of its films over the
Internet in the United States, and $12 to watch the film from Australia.
This is an example of

(A) collusion
(B) price discrimination
(C) economies of scale
(D) a cartel
(E) game theory
The following table illustrates choices available to firm A and firm B.
Use this table to answer questions 333–336.

333. Using the table, which decision would result in the best
outcome for firm A?
(A) Firm A lowers prices and Firm B raises prices.
(B) Firm B lowers prices and Firm A raises prices.
(C) Firms A and B both raise prices.
(D) Firms A and B both lower prices.
(E) none of the above

334. Which outcome would be best for both firms?
(A) Firm A raises prices and Firm B raises prices.
(B) Firm A lowers prices and Firm B raises prices.
(C) Firm A raises prices and Firm B lowers prices.
(D) Firm A lowers prices and Firm B lowers prices.
(E) none of the above
335. In which type of market would a firm use a payoff matrix to
set pricing policy?
(A) a monopoly
(B) perfect competition
(C) monopolistic competition
(D) oligopoly
(E) natural monopoly
336. If Firm A and Firm B are in a prisoner’s dilemma situation,
the Nash equilibrium is
(A) Firm A defects and Firm B defects
(B) Firm A cooperates and Firm B defects
(C) Firm A defects and Firm B cooperates
(D) Firm A cooperates and Firm B cooperates
(E) none of the above

337. A group of oil producers have formed a cartel. The cartel is
restricting quantity supplied to set a higher price for oil. To maximize
its profit, an individual oil producer should
(A) raise the price of its oil
(B) lower the price of its oil
(C) increase quantity supplied for its oil
(D) decrease quantity supplied for its oil
(E) leave the oil price and quantity supplied unchanged
This table illustrates choices available to Betty’s and Joey’s, two
restaurants. Refer to this table for questions 338 and 339.

338. Which is the dominant strategy for Joey’s?
(A) Don’t buy ads, no matter what happens.
(B) Buy ads only if Betty’s buys ads.
(C) Don’t buy ads if Betty’s buys ads.
(D) Buy ads no matter what happens.

(E) none of the above
339. Which choice results in the lowest profit for Betty’s and
Joey’s?
(A) Joey’s buys ads and Betty’s buys ads.
(B) Joey’s buys ads and Betty’s does not buy ads.
(C) Joey’s does not buy ads and Betty’s does not buy ads.
(D) Joey’s does not buy ads and Betty’s buys ads.
(E) none of the above
340. An auto parts manufacturer decides to produce car doors
worth $80,000. It could have produced car windows worth $60,000
instead. Its implicit costs were
(A) $20,000
(B) $60,000
(C) $80,000
(D) $0
(E) $140,000
341. Several manufacturers of luxury cars work together in order
to keep the price of these products high. By doing so, the price of the
car is far higher had they not worked together. This is an example of
(A) marginal social benefit
(B) a monopoly
(C) a monopsony

(D) perfect competition
(E) an oligopoly
342. Which of the following is considered to be a trait of a
monopoly?
(A) no legal barriers to entry
(B) high number of substitute goods
(C) downward-sloping demand
(D) no deliberate actions or attempts to control the market
price
(E) high number of competitors
343. How are monopolies and oligopolies similar?
(A) Both market systems are characterized by high barriers to
entry.
(B) Both are characterized by markets in which there is no
possible substitute.
(C) There are no selling costs in either market structure.
(D) Both markets are defined by having only one company
which sets the price.
(E) Companies are price takers.
344. Companies A, B, C, and D are the only companies in the
electricity supply market. Why do they have an incentive to form a
cartel?

(A) because this allows them to cooperate in market
conditions
(B) because this allows them to provide less quality to
consumers
(C) because this allows them to increase the price that
consumers have to pay
(D) because it allows the consumers to increase the
deadweight cost of the market
(E) because it allows the consumers to decrease the
deadweight cost of the market
345. In Market A, the market structure is that of a monopoly. In
Market B,
the market structure is that of a perfectly competitive market.
Information about preferences by relevant actors is provided in the
following table. Which of the following would MOST likely be the
price of the product for each of these markets?

(A) The price will be $200 for A and $250 for B because
companies are price setters regardless of market structure.
(B) The price will be $150 for both markets, as the price is
determined by the average of what companies require and what
consumers are expected to pay.

(C) The price will be $100 for A and $50 for B because fair
market regulations always determine the price.
(D) The price will be $200 for A and $50 for B because firms
are price setters in monopolies and price takers in a perfectly
competitive market.
(E) The price will be $100 for A and $250 for B because
companies have a higher level of market power in a perfectly
competitive market.
346. Suppose an ice cream producer buys a competing ice cream
producer. This is an example of
(A) vertical integration
(B) horizontal integration
(C) a monopoly
(D) an oligopoly
(E) a corporation
347. Many small farms are producing oranges. There is little
differentiation among the oranges, and farms enter and exit the orange
industry on a regular basis. As a result,
(A) the market is not very competitive
(B) the orange farms have low pricing power
(C) the orange farms have high pricing power
(D) the orange farms have established an oligopoly
(E) the orange farms have large economies of scale

348. A tax software firm has 40 percent market share. Its main
competitor has 30 percent market share. If the first firm wants to gain
market share, it should
(A) invest in software patents to create stronger barriers to
entry
(B) consider how the other tax software company will respond
to its business decisions
(C) attempt to become a price maker rather than a price taker
(D) reduce prices to attract customers from the other tax
software company
(E) buy out the other tax software company
349. Many clothing stores are competing for customers in a city
by offering unique styles. These clothing stores are likely to
(A) open for business or shut down infrequently
(B) spend much of their revenue on ads
(C) consider other clothing stores’ strategic plans before
making business decisions
(D) be unable to raise prices without losing all of their
customers
(E) have detailed information about clothing buyers and other
clothing stores
350. A water company has 100 percent market share in a city. To
make the water market most efficient, the government should
(A) separate the water company into several firms to end its
monopoly

(B) eliminate price regulations on water to encourage
competition
(C) grant the water company a natural monopoly
(D) allow any firm to build water pipes to homes
(E) shut down the water company for violating antitrust laws
351. How are monopolies and oligopolies similar?
(A) Companies are price takers in both market structures.
(B) Companies have perfectly differentiated products in both
market structures.
(C) Both are examples of ineffective market structures.
(D) Both are characterized by a perfectly inelastic demand
curve.
(E) Both earn no economic profit in the long run.
352. A small town has numerous small restaurants that have
almost identical menus. When surveyed about their satisfaction with
the culinary options in their town, many of the residents primarily
emphasized that they cannot stand so many different ads on their TVs
and radios. The restaurants do not work together to keep high prices.
What is this MOST likely an example of ?
(A) a monopoly
(B) a perfectly competitive market
(C) an oligopoly
(D) a monopolistic market

(E) a monopsony
353. How does an oligopoly compare to monopolistic
competition?
(A) Companies are price takers in both, but only in
oligopolies can a change in the price by one company potentially
cause a price war.
(B) Companies are price setters in both, and in case one of the
companies changes the price, a price war can start in both market
structures.
(C) Companies are price takers in a monopolistic competition,
while they are price setters in an oligopoly. In case one company
changes the price, there is no impact in either market structure.
(D) Companies are price setters in a monopolistic
competition, while they are price takers in an oligopoly. In case
one of the companies changes the price in an oligopoly, nothing
will occur, but a price war will start in a monopolistic competition.
(E) Companies are price setters in both market structures. In
case one company changes the price, a price war can start in an
oligopoly, while this is not possible in the case of monopolistic
competition.
354. Which of the following is a trait of a monopolistic
competition?
(A) Companies are price takers.
(B) Demand is highly elastic to price changes.
(C) Companies cannot make excess profit in the short run.
(D) There is only one company that operates in the market.

(E) There are numerous options for price differentiation.

CHAPTER 5
Factor Markets
355. A golf club manufacturer has a marginal cost of $50 and
marginal revenue of $50 for a golf club. Its average cost for a golf club
is $60 and the price at the equilibrium price point is $80. If it sells 100
golf clubs at the equilibrium price point, what is its economic profit?
(A) Its economic profit is $8,000, or equilibrium price ×
quantity demanded.
(B) Its economic profit is $5,000, or marginal revenue ×
quantity demanded.
(C) Its economic profit is $2,000, or (equilibrium price −
average cost) × quantity demanded.
(D) Its economic profit is $3,000, or (equilibrium price –
marginal cost) × quantity demanded.
(E) Its economic profit is $6,000, or marginal cost × quantity
demanded.
356. A year later, the golf club manufacturer’s average cost is $70
and the equilibrium price point is also $70. This likely happened
because

(A) other firms saw the opportunity for an economic profit
and began manufacturing golf clubs
(B) consumers lost interest in playing golf
(C) equipment in the golf club factory broke down
(D) raw materials for golf club production became less
expensive
(E) golf club manufacturers left the market
357. Two software companies cross-license their patents to each
other, giving both firms access to patents held by either company. This
is an attempt to create
(A) a monopoly
(B) an economy of scale
(C) a barrier to entry
(D) monopolistic competition
(E) D and C
358. A hydropower plant has a natural monopoly on supplying
power to a city and a pharmaceutical company has a monopoly on a
patented drug. The difference between these monopolies is
(A) the hydro plant has a temporary monopoly
(B) the pharmaceutical company has a temporary monopoly
(C) the pharmaceutical company has been granted its
monopoly by regulators
(D) both firms are violating antitrust laws

(E) the hydro plant has been granted its monopoly by
regulators
359. A pharmaceutical firm is currently earning an economic
profit on a patented drug. The patent will expire soon. To continue
earning an economic profit, the pharmaceutical firm should
(A) invent a new drug
(B) raise the price of its existing drug
(C) lower the price of its existing drug
(D) stop manufacturing the drug immediately
(E) keep the price of the drug the same
360. An auto factory produces cars at an average cost of $10,000
per car. It invests in a larger facility and its average cost rises to
$12,000, reducing its economic profit by $2,000 per car. The auto
factory’s profit decreased because of
(A) lower production efficiency
(B) new market entrants
(C) economies of scale
(D) a decrease in demand for cars
(E) an increase in demand for cars
361. John is starting his own business after years of working in a
factory. In order to maximize his profit, how many workers should he
hire?
(A) He should hire until the marginal cost equals marginal
revenue.

(B) He should hire until the marginal product equals marginal
factor cost.
(C) He should hire until the marginal cost equals marginal
factor cost.
(D) He should hire until the marginal revenue product equals
marginal factor cost.
(E) He should hire until the marginal revenue product equals
marginal cost.
362. A popcorn factory makes popcorn with salt, cooking oil, and
corn kernels. Demand for popcorn decreases. As a result,
(A) demand for salt decreases
(B) demand for cooking oil increases
(C) the popcorn factory will hire more workers
(D) demand for corn kernels increases
(E) the popcorn factory will buy more production equipment
363. The MFC of labor rises in country A and falls in country B.
As a result,
(A) manufacturers will hire workers in country A and country
B
(B) manufacturers will lay off workers in country A and
country B
(C) manufacturers will hire workers in country A and lay off
workers in country B

(D) manufacturers will lay off workers in country A and hire
workers in country B
(E) employment will remain unchanged in both countries
364. Country X creates a new job training program for its
citizens. Country Y reduces its spending on job training for its citizens.
As a result,
(A) the MRP for labor will fall in country X and country Y
(B) the MRP for labor will rise in country X and fall in
country Y
(C) the MRP for labor will rise in country X and country Y
(D) the MRP for labor will rise in country Y and fall in
country X
(E) the MRP for labor in country X and country Y will not
change
365. A rancher can buy 10 bags of feed for $8 per bag. Buying 11
bags of feed will cost $9 per bag. MFC for the eleventh bag of feed is
(A) $8
(B) $9
(C) $10
(D) $11
(E) $19
366. Demand for raw materials is a
(A) direct demand

(B) positive externality
(C) fixed cost
(D) derived demand
(E) negative externality
Refer to the following graph for questions 367 and 368. Wheat is an
input for bread.

367. If demand for bread shifts from D2 to D3, what happens to
the market for wheat?
(A) Demand for wheat rises.
(B) Demand for wheat falls.
(C) Demand for wheat stays the same.
(D) Quantity demanded falls for wheat.

(E) The price of wheat falls.
368. In this example, demand for wheat and bread can be
described, respectively, as
(A) derived demand and direct demand
(B) direct demand and derived demand
(C) both are derived demand
(D) both are direct demand
(E) unrelated to one another
369. If more workers moved to towns where automotive plants
were located, what will happen to the labor supply curve for auto
manufacturers?
(A) The labor supply curve will become horizontal.
(B) The labor supply curve will become vertical.
(C) The labor supply curve will shift to the left.
(D) The labor supply curve will shift to the right.
(E) There would be no change.
370. How would advancements in technology affect a firm’s labor
demand curve?
(A) It would become horizontal.
(B) It would become vertical.
(C) It would shift to the right.

(D) It would shift to the left.
(E) There would be no change.
371. A lawnmower factory sells lawnmowers for $200. With one
worker, it can make three lawnmowers. With two workers, it can make
five lawnmowers. With three workers, it can make six lawnmowers. If
the MFC for labor decreased from $400 to $200, the lawnmower
factory would
(A) hire one worker
(B) hire two workers
(C) leave its workforce unchanged
(D) lay off one worker
(E) lay off two workers
372. A taco truck has no local competitors. With four workers, it
can make 100 tacos and sell them for $4 each. With five workers, it
can make 150 tacos, but the market price will fall to $3 per taco. The
taco truck will hire a fifth worker if the MFC of labor is equal to
(A) $100
(B) $50
(C) $150
(D) $200
(E) $400
373. A cupcake store has no local competitors. With three
workers, it can make 100 cupcakes and sell them for $2 each. If it hires

a fourth worker, it can make 200 cupcakes and sell them for $1.50
each. MRP for the fourth worker is
(A) $200
(B) $150
(C) $100
(D) $50
(E) $0
374. If a community college canceled its nursing classes, what
will happen to the labor supply curve for nearby hospitals?
(A) It will become vertical.
(B) It will become horizontal.
(C) It will shift to the left.
(D) It will shift to the right.
(E) It will not change.
375. A food processing company uses onions to make onion
rings. If the price of onions increases and onions and labor are
complementary resources, what would happen to the food processing
company’s labor demand curve?
(A) It will become vertical.
(B) It will become horizontal.
(C) It will shift to the left.
(D) It will shift to the right.

(E) There would be no change.
376. A motorcycle factory uses machinery and labor to produce
motorcycles. If the motorcycle factory purchases more efficient
machinery, its demand for labor will decrease if
(A) machinery and labor are complementary resources
(B) machinery and labor are substitute resources
(C) the price of motorcycles rises
(D) demand for motorcycles rises
(E) the price of labor decreases
377. An airplane factory uses machinery and labor to produce
airplanes. If the airplane factory buys more efficient machinery, its
demand for labor will increase if
(A) the price of airplanes falls
(B) demand for airplanes falls
(C) the price of airplanes increases
(D) machinery and labor are complementary resources
(E) machinery and labor are substitute resources
378. A soda manufacturer produces soda using sugar and
carbonated water. If soda has a high elasticity of demand, the soda
manufacturer’s demand for carbonated water will be
(A) more elastic
(B) less elastic

(C) inelastic
(D) perfectly inelastic
(E) none of the above
379. A restaurant uses wheat tortillas to make tacos. If corn
tortillas are available in the market and can be used as a substitute for
wheat tortillas, the restaurant’s demand for wheat tortillas will be
(A) more elastic
(B) less elastic
(C) inelastic
(D) perfectly inelastic
(E) none of the above
380. A canned soup company uses 10 types of beans to produce
minestrone soup and one type of bean to produce chili. The firm’s
demand for a single type of bean used in minestrone soup production,
compared with its demand for the chili bean, will be
(A) more elastic
(B) less elastic
(C) just as elastic
(D) inelastic
(E) perfectly inelastic
381. Trucking company A has trucks available for new drivers.
Trucking company B does not have any more trucks for new drivers,
although new workers can still help unload boxes, which has a smaller

impact on productivity than what a new driver would contribute. In
comparison with trucking company B, trucking company A’s demand
for labor will be
(A) more elastic
(B) less elastic
(C) just as elastic
(D) inelastic
(E) perfectly inelastic
382. If firms hire 15 percent fewer production workers when the
wage of production workers increases by 45 percent, the price
elasticity of labor demand is
(A) 0.33
(B) –0.33
(C) 3
(D) –3
(E) 0
383. If wages rise 40 percent, and 20 percent more production
workers enter the market, the price elasticity of labor supply is
(A) 0.5
(B) –0.5
(C) 2
(D) –2

(E) 0
384. If the MFC of labor decreases,
(A) employment increases
(B) unemployment increases
(C) labor demand decreases
(D) labor supply remains unchanged
(E) labor demand remains unchanged
385. Demand for production inputs is a
(A) derived demand
(B) product of positive externalities
(C) product of negative externalities
(D) direct demand
(E) function of the elasticity of demand
386. Consumers demand hamburgers. A restaurant purchases beef
to produce hamburgers. Demand for hamburgers is a(n)
(A) derived demand
(B) direct demand
(C) factor of production
(D) cost of production
(E) indirect demand

387. Consumers demand trucks from a truck manufacturer.
Because of derived demand, the truck manufacturer will
(A) hire production workers
(B) shut down truck manufacturing plants
(C) create differentiated trucks
(D) offer a discount on last year’s truck model
(E) buy radio ads
388. A cookie factory uses wheat and sugar to produce cookies.
Wheat and sugar are complementary resources. If the MFC of wheat
increases,
(A) sugar demand will fall
(B) sugar demand will rise
(C) sugar demand will stay the same
(D) the price of cookies will fall
(E) the cookie factory will increase production
389. A suit manufacturer has eight employees who can produce
20 suits. The suits sell for $100 each. With nine employees, the firm
can produce 24 suits. Marginal revenue product for the ninth employee
is
(A) $100
(B) $400
(C) $2,000

(D) $2,400
(E) $800
390. A refrigerator manufacturer has five employees who can
produce 10 refrigerators. Each refrigerator sells for $500. With six
employees, the firm can produce 12 refrigerators. Marginal revenue
product for the sixth employee is
(A) $500
(B) $5,000
(C) $1,000
(D) $6,000
(E) $2,000
391. A saw manufacturer has eight workers who can produce 30
saws. With nine workers, it can produce 25 saws. Each saw sells for
$10 on the market. Marginal revenue product for the ninth worker is
(A) $300
(B) $250
(C) $50
(D) –$50
(E) $100
392. A golf club factory has five workers. It pays wages of $500
per day and makes 20 golf clubs, which sell for $50 each. With six
workers, it would pay wages of $600 per day and make 24 golf clubs.
The golf club factory should hire another worker because

(A) marginal product is positive
(B) marginal revenue product is less than marginal factor cost
(C) marginal product is increasing
(D) total revenue would increase
(E) marginal revenue product is positive
393. A waffle truck sells waffles for $2.50 each. With three
employees, its revenue is $250. With four employees, its revenue is
$375. Marginal product for the fourth employee is
(A) 50
(B) 150
(C) 100
(D) 250
(E) 200
394. A table manufacturer uses wood to produce tables.
Consumers start demanding more tables. Because of derived demand,
(A) the supply of wood will increase
(B) the supply of wood will decrease
(C) the price of wood will increase
(D) the price of wood will decrease
(E) none of the above

395. If employees were required to attend training courses, how
would this affect labor productivity?
(A) It would increase.
(B) It would decrease.
(C) It would remain the same.
(D) It would shift the supply curve to the left.
(E) It would have no effect on supply.
396. The financial indicators for a company are in the following
table. Based on the information, which of the following is the marginal
revenue product of labor?

(A) $50
(B) $56
(C) $500
(D) $3,200
(E) $5,000
397. The marginal revenue of a company is three times larger
than the company’s marginal cost. If the company’s marginal cost is $5

and the marginal product is $6, what is the value of the marginal
revenue product of labor?
(A) $15
(B) $50
(C) $65
(D) $75
(E) $90
398. Marginal product is
(A) the total value of all goods produced
(B) the value of goods produced by adding one more
production input
(C) the quantity of goods produced by adding one more
production input
(D) the total quantity of goods produced
(E) also known as scrap or waste
399. Which of the following would result in higher demand for
soda factory workers?
(A) The price of sugar used in soda production increases.
(B) Consumers buy more soda.
(C) Consumers begin drinking tea instead of drinking soda.
(D) Manufacturers shut down soda factories.

(E) Energy drinks gain popularity as an alternative to soda.
400. Which example illustrates derived demand?
(A) A new tomato harvester increases tomato production.
(B) Tomato farm workers go on strike and tomato supply
falls.
(C) Ketchup demand increases, and tomato demand increases
as a result.
(D) A new pesticide reduces pest damage to the tomato crop.
(E) Scientists discover health benefits of tomatoes.
401. MRP for a hot dog truck’s second, third, and fourth workers
is $150, $140, and $130, respectively. The city requires the hot dog
truck to pay for health benefits for its workers, increasing MFC for a
worker from $130 to $150. The hot dog truck should
(A) hire one more worker
(B) lay off one worker
(C) shut down
(D) lay off two workers
(E) hire two more workers
402. A cabinet manufacturer has seven employees. Each
employee earns a wage of $25,000. To attract an eighth employee, it
would have to offer a wage of $30,000 to the new employee and
current employees would receive a raise to $30,000 as well. MFC for
the eighth employee is
(A) $175,000

(B) $65,000
(C) $40,000
(D) $5,000
(E) $240,000
403. A smoothie shop uses bananas to make smoothies. The price
of bananas increases. As a result,
(A) MFC increases
(B) profit increases
(C) MP increases
(D) labor demand increases
(E) fixed cost increases
404. A truck manufacturer can produce one more truck if it hires
another employee for $40,000. It can also produce one more truck if it
buys $50,000 worth of machinery. A truck sells on the market for
$60,000. The truck manufacturer should
(A) hire employees until the cost of the next employee equals
the cost of buying machinery to produce another truck
(B) buy machinery until the cost of buying machinery to
produce another car equals the cost of hiring another employee
(C) sell machinery and lay off employees
(D) lay off employees and buy machinery
(E) none of the above

405. Seth finally realized his dream to open a 24-hour bagel café,
which sells wheat bagels. Which of the following scenarios would
increase Seth’s demand for labor?
(A) The price of wheat increases.
(B) Wheat farmers go on strike.
(C) The price of wheat decreases.
(D) A blight destroys thousands of acres of farmland.
(E) The government establishes a tax on wheat.
406. Derived demand refers to which of the following?
(A) Labor demand for a business is the MRP curve.
(B) Demand for labor comes from the demand for the product
produced.
(C) The combination of labor and capital helps minimize total
costs.
(D) A business hires workers to the point where MRP = MFC.
(E) Certain firms are wage setters.
407. Wages fall in Arizona and rise in Nevada. As a result,
(A) manufacturers will hire workers in Arizona and Nevada
(B) manufacturers will lay off workers in Arizona and Nevada
(C) manufacturers will hire workers in Arizona and lay off
workers in Nevada

(D) manufacturers will lay off workers in Arizona and hire
workers in Nevada
(E) employment will remain unchanged in Arizona and
Nevada
408. New York offers free university education for state residents,
while Nebraska increases tuition for state universities. As a result,
(A) the MRP for labor will rise in New York and Nebraska
(B) the MRP for labor will rise in New York and fall in
Nebraska
(C) the MRP for labor will fall in New York and Nebraska
(D) the MRP for labor will fall in New York and rise in
Nebraska
(E) the MRP for labor in New York and Nebraska will not
change
409. Which of the following is an example of derived demand?
(A) People desire food to eat, so farms invest in tractors and
hire workers.
(B) The wages of farmhands increase, so supply decreases
and demand increases.
(C) The wages of farmhands decrease, so supply increases
and demand decreases.
(D) People desire food to eat, so farms raise the price of food.
(E) none of the above

410. All of the following will increase the demand for doctors
EXCEPT
(A) the government requires firms to pay for health care for
their employees
(B) all citizens are enrolled in a national health care program
(C) a cure is found for the common cold
(D) flu sweeps across the nation and sickens thousands
(E) venture capitalists invest more money in health care firms
411. If the output effect is greater than the substitution effect,
what will happen to the demand for labor?
(A) It increases.
(B) It decreases.
(C) It increases and then gradually decreases.
(D) It decreases and then gradually increases.
(E) It remains the same.
412. An increase in MRP for labor will result in
(A) a decrease in labor demand
(B) an increase in labor demand
(C) a shift of the labor supply curve to the left
(D) no change in labor demand
(E) none of the above

413. The marginal revenue product of labor refers to which of the
following?
(A) It measures the cost a business must pay for using one
more unit of a factor of production.
(B) It is the value that the next unit of labor brings to the firm.
(C) The combination of labor and capital helps minimize total
costs.
(D) A business hires workers to the point where MRP =
MRC.
(E) Certain firms are wage setters.
414. If the wage of the last worker hired by a firm is greater than
MRP of labor, the firm should
(A) hire more workers
(B) increase supply
(C) decrease supply
(D) lay off workers
(E) do nothing
415. Immigration has which of the following effects?
(A) It will move the labor supply curve from their country of
origin to the right. In the country to which they moved, the curve
will shift to the left.
(B) It will move the labor supply curve from their country of
origin to the right. In the country to which they moved, the curve
will shift to the right.

(C) It will move the labor supply curve from their country of
origin to the left. In the country to which they moved, the curve
will shift to the right.
(D) It will increase revenue for firms.
(E) It will decrease the labor demand curves.
416. If the price of raw materials increases, what will happen to
labor demand?
(A) Labor demand will increase.
(B) Labor demand will remain the same.
(C) Labor demand will decrease.
(D) Labor demand will drive prices lower.
(E) Labor demand will have no effect on price.
417. What will happen to labor demand if the price of a
complementary resource rises?
(A) Labor demand will decrease.
(B) Labor demand will remain the same.
(C) Labor demand will increase.
(D) Labor demand will force the price of the product lower.
(E) Labor demand will have no effect on price.
418. The least-cost hiring rule refers to
(A) firms that are wage setters

(B) a business hiring workers to the point where MRP = MFC
(C) the combination of labor and capital helping minimize
total costs
(D) measuring the cost a business must pay for using one
more unit of a factor of production
(E) the value that the next unit of a resource brings to the firm
419. All else equal, as the MFC of labor increases,
(A) unemployment decreases
(B) employment decreases
(C) the supply of labor remains the same
(D) demand remains the same
(E) none of the above
420. Diners wish to eat food at a restaurant. Because of derived
demand, the restaurant will
(A) spend money on television ads
(B) buy cooking ingredients
(C) reduce prices because of a decline in rent costs
(D) petition regulators to reduce its taxes
(E) create a differentiated menu
421. An auto parts manufacturer has five workers who can
produce 10 auto parts. These parts sell for $3 each. If it hires a sixth

worker, it can produce 15 auto parts. Marginal revenue product for the
sixth worker is
(A) $45
(B) $30
(C) $5
(D) $15
(E) $50
422. An ice cream stand has eight employees. They can produce
20 ice cream cones, which sell for $2 each. If it hires a ninth employee,
it can produce 24 ice cream cones. If it hires a tenth employee, it can
produce 27 ice cream cones. Marginal revenue product for the tenth
employee is
(A) $40
(B) $48
(C) $8
(D) $6
(E) $54
423. A fishing boat has six crew members, who can catch 40 fish.
The fish can be sold at the market for $4 each. If the boat hires a
seventh crew member, the total catch will be 35 fish. Marginal revenue
product for the seventh crew member is
(A) $160
(B) $140

(C) $20
(D) –$20
(E) $0
424. A hot dog stand has four workers. It pays wages of $400 per
day and makes 100 hot dogs, which it sells for $5 each. With five
workers, it would pay an additional $120 in wages and make 20 more
hot dogs. The hot dog stand should not hire the fifth worker because
(A) marginal product would be negative
(B) total revenue would fall
(C) marginal product is declining
(D) marginal revenue product is less than marginal factor cost
(E) marginal factor cost is rising
425. A golf club manufacturer uses graphite to produce golf
clubs. Consumers start demanding more golf clubs. Because of derived
demand,
(A) the price of graphite will increase
(B) the price of graphite will decrease
(C) the supply of graphite will increase
(D) the supply of graphite will decrease
(E) none of the above
426. A taco truck sells tacos for $3 each. With four employees, its
revenue is $450. If it hires a fifth employee, revenue will be $600.
Marginal product for the fifth employee is

(A) 200
(B) 150
(C) 100
(D) 50
(E) 30
427. A surfboard manufacturer adds a seventh worker. Total
revenue increases from $900 to $1,000. Production increases from 18
to 20 surfboards. Marginal revenue for a surfboard is
(A) $100
(B) $50
(C) $45
(D) $55
(E) $20
428. Marginal resource cost is equal to
(A) marginal revenue multiplied by the cost of a unit of output
(B) total cost for producing every unit of output
(C) the cost of producing the next unit of output
(D) the average cost of producing a unit of output
(E) total revenue divided by the market price of a unit of
output

429. Which of the following would NOT result in higher demand
for car factory workers?
(A) The cost of steel used in car manufacturing decreases.
(B) Consumers purchase more cars.
(C) Consumers begin taking the train to work instead of
driving their cars.
(D) Firms construct more car manufacturing plants.
(E) Bus ridership declines as a result of economic expansion.
430. Which example illustrates derived demand?
(A) Consumers increase their purchases of corn tortillas, so
the price of corn rises.
(B) Technology makes wheat production more efficient, so
the output of wheat flour increases.
(C) Workers move from country A to country B in search of
economic opportunities.
(D) A truck factory shuts down after workers go on strike.
(E) A heat wave causes the sugar beet price to rise on the
market.
431. MRP for a hot dog stand’s fifth, sixth, and seventh workers
is $140, $120, and $100, respectively. If the wage for a hot dog stand
worker is $120, the hot dog stand should
(A) employ four workers
(B) employ five workers

(C) employ six workers
(D) employ seven workers
(E) employ eight workers
432. MRP for a shaved ice stand’s first, second, and third workers
is $95, $90, and $85 per day, respectively. The shaved ice stand hires
workers until MRP = MFC. The government increases the minimum
daily wage from $85 to $90. The shaved ice stand should
(A) hire one more worker
(B) lay off one worker
(C) shut down
(D) lay off two workers
(E) hire two more workers
433. A skateboard manufacturer is the only employer in a small
town. It has 10 workers who each earn $40,000. It can hire another
worker at a wage of $50,000 and produce skateboards worth $60,000.
This would make its current workers demand a wage of $50,000 as
well. If the firm hired another worker,
(A) profit would increase because MFC < MRP
(B) profit would be unchanged because MFC = MRP
(C) profit would fall because MFC > MRP
(D) profit would increase
manufacturer has a monopoly
(E) none of the above

because

the

skateboard

434. An auto-body shop has six employees, who each earn
$30,000. If it hired a seventh employee, it would have to pay all of its
employees $40,000 each. MFC for the seventh employee is
(A) $10,000
(B) $30,000
(C) $40,000
(D) $100,000
(E) $280,000
435. A soft drink factory can buy 10 tons of sugar for $200 per
ton. If it buys 11 tons of sugar, it must pay $250 per ton. MFC for the
eleventh ton of sugar is
(A) $200
(B) $250
(C) $500
(D) $550
(E) $750
436. A sandwich shop uses roast beef to make sandwiches. The
price of roast beef decreases. As a result,
(A) MFC decreases
(B) profit decreases
(C) MP decreases
(D) labor demand decreases

(E) fixed cost decreases
437. If a labor market is an oligopsony, in comparison with
perfect competition it will have
(A) lower wages
(B) lower unemployment
(C) higher output
(D) less market power
(E) more firms in the market
438. A bicycle manufacturer purchases aluminum to make
bicycles. Demand for aluminum is a
(A) negative externality
(B) fixed cost
(C) derived demand
(D) negative externality
(E) factor of production
439. A cupcake manufacturer uses frosting to make cupcakes. If
demand for cupcakes increases,
(A) frosting demand will shift to the right
(B) frosting demand will shift to the left
(C) frosting demand will not change
(D) frosting price will decrease

(E) frosting quantity will decrease

CHAPTER 6
Market Failure and the Role of Government
440. A company which produces computers emits carbon dioxide,
which causes $15,000 in social costs for the community. The company
earns $1,000,000 annually and considers itself to be a corporate
socially responsible entity. What would be the BEST way to make the
social benefit of the company operating equal to the marginal costs of
its operation for society?
(A) if the company was prohibited from operating anymore
(B) if the company had to pay a fine of $10,000 every year
(C) if the company were subject to a tax of 15 percent
(D) if the company were subject to a tax of 1.5 percent
(E) if the company were to pay a fine of $25,000 every year
441. Why are antitrust laws used by governments?
(A) to prevent inequality between the rich and the poor
(B) to prevent a company from using dangerous and
potentially untested products

(C) to prevent rapid inflation and the Federal Reserve from
making independent decisions
(D) to prevent corruption and government officials being
bribed by lobbyists
(E) to prevent monopolies forming and to ensure fair market
standards
442. A good that is excludable to other consumers and rivals is
known as a
(A) public good
(B) quasi-public good
(C) positive externality
(D) common resource
(E) private good
443. If a positive externality emerges in regard to the demand
curve,
(A) MEB is not represented
(B) MEC is represented
(C) MSC is represented
(D) marginal private benefits are not represented
(E) none of the above
444. If the U.S. government increases a tax to help redistribute
income from the wealthy to the poor, it is following a

(A) proportional tax system
(B) tariff system
(C) progressive tax system
(D) regressive tax system
(E) neutral tax system
445. A negative externality will exist when
(A) all consumers receive an equal share of economic
resources
(B) spillover costs are given to others not directly involved in
the consumption or production of a good or service
(C) the production of a good or service creates a spillover
benefit
(D) members of a community pay for a good or service while
others do not yet benefit
(E) there is a large unequal distribution of income in a society
446. The private sector will NOT provide for a public good or
service because of
(A) the income effect
(B) the interest rates effect
(C) the free-rider problem
(D) spillover costs
(E) all of the above

447. A positive externality will exist when
(A) all consumers receive an equal share of economic
resources
(B) spillover costs are given to others not directly involved in
the consumption or production of a good or service
(C) the production of a good or service creates a spillover
benefit
(D) members of a community pay for a good or service while
others do not yet benefit
(E) there is an equal distribution of income in a society
448. If firms overproduce a good or service and charge a price
that is too low, it is likely that
(A) a negative externality exists
(B) a positive externality exists
(C) spillover costs are subsidized by the government
(D) the firm is at the shutdown point
(E) A, C, and D
449. A coal company has had a record-breaking quarter while
operating in Indiana. Which of the following would be an example of a
negative externality of production?
(A) the company deciding to hire additional employees
(B) the company’s factories causing environmental harm

(C) the company paying higher taxes because of additional
revenue
(D) the company paying its suppliers more because of higher
demand
(E) the company earning more money through increased
production
450. Samantha’s earnings are shown in the following table. Based
on her earnings and the amount of taxes paid, which kind of taxing
system is shown?

(A) flat
(B) progressive
(C) regressive
(D) incentivized
(E) supplemental
451. Tera International has discovered a permanent vaccine for
the common flu. The company filed a patent which grants it a natural
monopoly for this product. What can the government do to ensure that
Tera produces at the allocatively efficient quantity?

(A) The government should regulate a minimum amount of
vaccines the company needs to produce.
(B) The government should provide a lump-sum subsidy.
(C) The government should implement a per-unit tax.
(D) The government should implement a lump-sum tax.
(E) The government should set a price ceiling.
452. Tim’s earnings are shown in the following table. How much
taxes would he have to pay in case he earned $135,000 in case the
country he lives in has a flat tax?

(A) $5,000
(B) $12,000
(C) $13,500
(D) $15,000
(E) $16,500
453. If the supply curve is shifted to S2, which of the following is
TRUE?
(A) Marginal social costs are not reflected in the supply curve.
(B) Marginal social costs are reflected in the supply curve.

(C) Output has reached the socially optimum level.
(D) The demand curve will also shift to the left.
(E) both B and C
454. A private business will NOT produce a good like a public
radio station because
(A) MC is greater than MB
(B) there is zero profit for this good
(C) the government owns a monopoly for this type of service
(D) the free-rider problem exists
(E) all of the above
455. The information about the Gini coefficient for several
countries is provided in the following table. Which has the FEWEST
issues concerning inequality?

(A) the United Kingdom, as its value is closest to 0.5
(B) India, as it has the lowest value of the Gini coefficient
(C) Belgium, as its value is in the middle of the table

(D) Slovenia, as it has the lowest possible value within the
table
(E) Canada, as its value is equal to 1
456. The reason a general sales tax is regressive is because
(A) low-income families pay a higher portion of their income
than high-income families do
(B) the tax is paid for by the seller, not the buyer
(C) the tax is paid for by the buyer, not the seller
(D) low-income families pay less of the tax than households
with higher incomes do
(E) tax rates do not vary as compared with income
457. The fact that a firefighter’s job is more dangerous than a
college professor’s job is an example of
(A) compensating differential
(B) a negative externality
(C) the free-rider problem
(D) the ability to pay principle
(E) the benefits received principle
458. Of the following, which is a public good?
(A) a limousine
(B) tickets to a baseball game

(C) a subscription to the New York Times
(D) a fighter jet
(E) a bowl of ice cream
459. A “flat tax” is also known as
(A) ability to pay tax
(B) benefits received tax
(C) proportional tax
(D) income tax
(E) property tax
460. The information about earnings for Bill and Caroline is
provided in the following table. They do not live in the same country.
Which BEST describes the tax structure of these countries?

(A) Bill lives in a country that has a flat tax of 10 percent,
while Caroline lives in a country that has a regressive tax.
(B) Both Bill and Caroline live in a country that has a
progressive tax system, as they have paid more in taxes as their
incomes increased.

(C) Bill lives in a country that has a progressive tax rate,
while Caroline lives in a country that has a flat tax rate.
(D) Bill lives in a country that has a flat tax rate of 20 percent,
while Caroline lives in a country that has a regressive tax rate.
(E) Bill lives in a country that has a regressive tax rate, while
Caroline lives in a country with a progressive tax rate.
461. Last year Anna earned $50,000 in gross income and paid
$10,000 in taxes. She recently received a promotion. So next year she
will earn $75,000 in gross income and pay $15,000 in taxes. This
increase in taxes is a result of
(A) a regressive tax
(B) a progressive tax
(C) a proportional tax
(D) an ability to pay tax
(E) none of the above
462. Fire protection provided by a fire department is an example
of a(n)
(A) private good
(B) inferior good
(C) normal good
(D) public good
(E) complementary good

463. Nation A has a higher Gini ratio than nation B. You can
conclude that nation A
(A) has a highly unequal distribution of income compared
with nation B
(B) has a more equal distribution of income compared with
nation B
(C) has an equal distribution of income compared with nation
B
(D) is allocating its resources to full efficiency
(E) is at full employment with no inflation
Use the following graph to answer questions 464 and 465.

464. The graph represents
(A) the percentage of income tax families pay in the United
States

(B) the percentage of families paying a regressive tax on their
incomes
(C) the percentage of families paying a flat tax on their
incomes
(D) the percentage of families paying a progressive tax in the
United States
(E) the distribution of income among families in the United
States
465. The arrow in the graph is pointing to the area between a
perfect distribution of income and the actual distribution of income. If
the Gini ratio is 0.9, it is said that this graph represents
(A) a highly unequal distribution of income
(B) a very equal distribution of income
(C) most families having the same socioeconomic status
(D) a society benefiting from egalitarianism
(E) a negative externality
466. Suppose Anna earns $50,000 a year and pays $10,000 in
taxes. Her friend Sarah earns $100,000 a year and pays only $12,000 a
year in taxes. This is an example of
(A) a progressive tax
(B) a proportional tax
(C) a negative externality
(D) being in a higher tax bracket

(E) a regressive tax
467. Why are published official government statistics an example
of a public good?
(A) because only a select few can have access to them
(B) because they are easily excludable
(C) because they are developed by private entities
(D) because no individual can be excluded from seeing them
(E) because they are regularly published
468. If income increases and the marginal tax rate falls, this is
also known as a
(A) regressive tax
(B) proportional tax
(C) flat tax
(D) progressive tax
(E) tax bracket
469. As income increases, the marginal tax rate increases. This is
known as a
(A) progressive tax
(B) regressive tax
(C) flat tax
(D) proportional tax

(E) tax bracket
470. A ride in a taxicab is a form of
(A) a public good
(B) a private good
(C) a government subsidy
(D) a positive externality
(E) the free-rider problem
471. NASA, an organization run by the federal government, sends
a satellite into space. The satellite broadcasts information about the
solar system to people around the world at no charge. The satellite
represents
(A) a private good
(B) a government subsidy
(C) a positive externality
(D) a public good
(E) the free-rider problem
472. The government helps with the redistribution of income
(A) only in a command economy
(B) only in a mixed economy
(C) through taxes
(D) through proportional taxes only

(E) only in a market economy
473. Why are efficiency-enhancing taxes used?
(A) to correct for a negative market outcome or inefficiency
(B) to subsidize industries that are trying to enter foreign
markets
(C) to subsidize companies that are producing oil and similar
products
(D) to tax companies that do not pay federal taxes
(E) to compensate for the impact of flat corporate taxes
474. The U.S. government has decided to provide an efficiencyenhancing subsidy for companies that want to use solar panels instead
of nonrenewable sources of energy. What is the goal of this subsidy?
(A) to ensure that more companies continue to use
nonrenewable energy sources
(B) to decrease the supply of solar panels
(C) to make solar panels more expensive
(D) to prevent corporate manufacturers from setting the price
of solar panels
(E) to make the marginal social benefit of solar panels equal
supply
475. A company in Portland has developed a new open-source
software for companies to use in database management. This software
can also be used by health care companies to storage data about
patients and work on analysis. What is this an example of ?

(A) the Nash equilibrium
(B) a positive externality
(C) a negative externality
(D) collective bargaining
(E) diminishing marginal returns
476. Which of the following is NOT an example of an efficiencyenhancing tax?
(A) a tax on an oil company for emitting too much carbon
dioxide
(B) a tax on an alcohol producer due to an increase in
alcoholics
(C) a tax on tobacco to try and minimize the number of
smokers
(D) a tax on foreign products that may compete with domestic
producers
(E) a tax on fast-food manufacturers due to an increase in the
number of obese people
477. A shopkeeper earns $100,000 and pays $15,000 in pension
taxes. The next year, the shopkeeper earns $150,000 and pays $15,000
in pension taxes. The pension tax is
(A) progressive
(B) based on ability to pay
(C) proportional

(D) regressive
(E) none of the above
478. Five gas stations sell 100,000 barrels of fuel. Economists
calculate that burning this fuel results in air pollution that costs society
$1,000,000. If regulators want the marginal social cost of fuel to equal
the marginal social benefit of fuel, they should
(A) pay a $10 per barrel subsidy to gas stations
(B) levy a $10 per barrel tax on gas stations
(C) make each gas station pay $200,000 in taxes
(D) shut down the gas stations
(E) none of the above
479. The government decides to encourage bus travel by paying a
subsidy to bus companies for each mile traveled. As a result of the
subsidy,
(A) bus supply will shift to the right
(B) bus demand will shift to the right
(C) bus supply will shift to the left
(D) bus demand will shift to the left
(E) none of the above
480. The government encourages consumers to buy efficient
refrigerators by paying a rebate to consumers. As a result of the rebate,
(A) demand for efficient refrigerators will shift to the right

(B) supply for efficient refrigerators will shift to the right
(C) demand for efficient refrigerators will shift to the left
(D) supply for efficient refrigerators will shift to the left
(E) none of the above
481. Which item is a public good?
(A) transport provided by a personal automobile
(B) law enforcement provided by a police car
(C) delivery provided by a pizza delivery car
(D) transport provided by a rental car
(E) transport provided by a personal truck
482. Country X had a Gini ratio of 0.40 last year. This year,
country X reported that its Gini ratio decreased to 0.35. We can
conclude that
(A) the income distribution in country X has become more
equal
(B) the income distribution in country X has become less
equal
(C) country X is experiencing a recession
(D) country X is experiencing an economic expansion
(E) country X has improved its freedom of the press
483. Country Y had a Gini ratio of 0.25 last year. This year, its
Gini ratio was 0.30. This indicates that

(A) the income distribution in country Y has become more
equal
(B) the income distribution in country Y has become less
equal
(C) country Y is experiencing a recession
(D) country Y is experiencing an economic expansion
(E) country Y reduced its business regulations
484. Country A has a Gini ratio of 0.20. Country B has a Gini
ratio of 0.25. Country C has a Gini ratio of 0.30. This indicates that
(A) country C has a more equal income distribution than
country B
(B) country B has a more equal income distribution than
country A
(C) country C has a more equal income distribution than
country A
(D) country B has a more equal income distribution than
country C
(E) none of the above
485. Countries D and E have the same Gini ratio. Country D
implements a proportional tax and country E implements a progressive
tax. As a result,
(A) country E will have a higher Gini ratio than country D
(B) country D will have a higher Gini ratio than country E
(C) country D will still have the same Gini Ratio as country E

(D) country D will have the same Gini ratio as country E
(E) none of the above
486. Cities B and C have the same Gini ratio. City B implements
a flat tax and city C implements a regressive tax. As a result,
(A) city B will have a higher Gini ratio than city C
(B) city C will have a higher Gini ratio than city B
(C) city C will still have the same Gini Ratio as city B
(D) both cities will have the same Gini ratio
(E) none of the above
487. The government allows all citizens to hunt birds on federal
land. The birds are an example of a
(A) public good
(B) common resource
(C) quasi-public good
(D) private good
(E) none of the above
488. A city charges drivers a toll to cross a bridge. The bridge has
enough capacity to handle normal traffic. The bridge is a
(A) common resource
(B) public good
(C) quasi-public good

(D) private good
(E) none of the above
489. A freeway is open to all citizens and does not charge a toll.
At rush hour, the freeway does not have enough room for all drivers.
During rush hour, the freeway is
(A) a public good
(B) a private good
(C) a quasi-public good
(D) a common resource
(E) none of the above
490. According to the Coase theorem, consumers can reach an
agreement when
(A) negotiating costs are low
(B) marginal cost does not equal marginal benefit
(C) the government intervenes
(D) positive externalities are present
(E) negative externalities are not present
491. The Coase theorem would not apply to a factory that was
polluting a river near a city because
(A) the pollution affects many people
(B) the factory’s liabilities are very clear

(C) negotiating costs are low
(D) the negotiation process is efficient
(E) there are no negative externalities
492. If firms underproduce a good or service and charge a price
that is too high, it is likely
(A) a negative externality exists
(B) a positive externality exists
(C) spillover costs are high
(D) the economy is expanding
(E) there is a government subsidy
493. When a government subsidizes student grants to attend
university for all students,
(A) it is creating a consumer subsidy
(B) it is creating a producer subsidy
(C) university education is a public good
(D) university education is a common resource
(E) both A and D
494. When a government grants a property tax exemptions to
universities but many students still cannot afford to attend universities,
(A) it is creating a consumer subsidy
(B) it is creating a producer subsidy

(C) university education is a public good
(D) university education is a private good
(E) both B and D
495. The government provides elementary school education to all
students, and once the students graduate they begin work at local
businesses. Productivity increases at these businesses. This is an
example of
(A) spillover costs
(B) spillover benefits
(C) negative externalities
(D) the Gini ratio
(E) market failure
496. Phantom demand refers to
(A) goods and services that consumers purchased in the past
(B) unaffordable goods and services
(C) market failure
(D) demand for public goods that consumers cannot purchase
directly
(E) demand that would exist if the economy expanded
497. The demand curve for a public good is
(A) the horizontal sum of each consumer’s demand curve

(B) the vertical sum of each consumer’s demand curve
(C) not measurable
(D) always horizontal
(E) always vertical
Use the following graph to answer questions 498 and 499.

498. The graph shows demand curves for a(n)
(A) private good
(B) inferior good
(C) luxury good
(D) public good
(E) capital good
499. The equilibrium price of this public good will be

(A) MB1 = MC
(B) MB2 = MC
(C) MB3 = MC
(D) MB SUM = MC
(E) none of the above
500. In comparison to the demand curve for all consumers, the
slope of the demand curve for an individual consumer of a public good
will be
(A) more steep
(B) more flat
(C) the same
(D) horizontal
(E) vertical

ANSWERS
Chapter 1
21. (D) Choice (D) is the correct answer because Deirdre can make
only one decision regarding how she will spend her time. An opportunity
cost represents the next best thing missed out on. In this case, it is missing
out on the $10 per hour babysitting job and not the $7 per hour library job.
All other choices are incorrect because they incorporate the two choices,
whereas opportunity costs represent only the next best alternative.
22. (A) Choice (A) is the correct answer because with any choice
people make, they must look at the relationship between marginal benefit
and marginal cost. If a decision, whether it be purchasing an item or going
for a walk, costs more than the benefit, then the person should not do it.
23. (E) Choice (E) is the correct answer because factors of production
refer to the inputs actually used to manufacture the product, while money is
used to purchase these inputs.
24. (A) Choice (A) is correct because the production possibilities curve
represents the maximum output between two goods using scarce resources.
As such, it represents the increasing opportunity costs incurred when the
production shifts to more of one product than the other. The more a
producer chooses to make of a product, the more the opportunity cost
increases for the product not being produced. This represents the law of
increasing costs.
25. (E) The correct choice is (E) because trade will exist between two
countries if there is a comparative advantage between the two countries or
each country is producing its good at a lower opportunity cost than the
other.

26. (D) The correct choice is (D) because if a society is overallocating,
then it is not utilizing its resources to allocative efficiency. This would
imply that the marginal benefit (MB) for producing goods and services with
these resources is less than the marginal cost (MC). In any economic
decision, it is best to have either MB > MC or MB = MC.
27. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because it best reflects the idea
of comparative advantage. If a producer can make a good at a lower
opportunity cost than all other producers, it is said that he or she has a
comparative advantage. Richard can mow the lawn at a lower opportunity
cost than Michele, so it would be mutually beneficial if he mowed the lawn
and Michele walked the dog.
28. (B) Choice (B) is the correct answer because opportunity cost
refers to the value of what is given up. In this scenario, Joe decided to
maximize hot dog production, giving up the opportunity to produce 400
hamburgers with his supplies. The prices of hot dogs and hamburgers are
not needed for this calculation.
29. (A) Choice (A) is correct because factors of production refer to all
the units that are used in the production of goods and services in hopes of
making a profit. They are categorized as land, labor, capital, and
entrepreneurship.
30. (B) Choice (B) is correct because the law of increasing costs refers
to how the more a good or service is produced, the more its opportunity
costs increase. If there is an increase in the production of good A, then the
opportunity cost, the next most valuable alternative, increases for good B.
31. (A) Choice (A) is correct because trade will exist between two
countries if there is a comparative advantage between the two countries or
each country is producing its good at a lower opportunity cost than the
other.
32. (A) Choice (A) is correct. According to the law of comparative
advantage, two nations should specialize production by producing goods at
the lowest possible cost. These nations should then engage in trade for the

products they stopped producing to specialize. Since Spain has a lower
opportunity cost for producing soccer balls as compared to Germany, it
should stop producing golf balls and focus on soccer balls.
33. (B) The correct choice is (B). Because the potential output could
increase, the production possibilities curve would shift to the right.
34. (D) The correct choice is (D). While all products are scarce, there
are some products where our consumption of them does not significantly
impact supply; these are non-rivalrous goods.
35. (C) Choice (C) is correct because opportunity cost is what is given
up when someone makes a decision. If your school decides to construct a
new performing arts center, all of the resources that could have been used in
another project are given up. The resources must go into the construction of
the performing arts center.
36. (A) The correct choice is (A). Whenever there is a cost to
consuming a good and it diminishes the supply of the good, it can be
considered scarce.
37. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer because marginal analysis refers
to the decision-making process based on marginal benefits versus marginal
costs.
38. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer because a market system has
complete decentralization of decision making for firms and consumers. A
mixed economy refers to a combination of capitalism and socialism, where
there are elements of centralized planning and a free market. Economies
with market systems do not currently exist because every nation’s
government makes some economic decisions. A command economy is the
opposite of a free market (where prices and the answers to the fundamental
questions of economics are answered by consumers and producers). A
command economy is also known as a planned economy.
39. (C) The correct choice is (C). While France has an absolute
advantage in both products, the economies of these countries would be most

efficient if France focused on producing cheese, where it is more effective,
while Italy should produce olive oil.
40. (B) The correct choice is (B) which best reflects the concept of
absolute advantage, while (A) reflects the concept of comparative
advantage.
41. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. At the point on the production
possibilities curve where MB = MC, production is both productively
efficient and allocatively efficient.
42. (D) Choice (D) is correct because a market system is characterized
by a decentralization of decision making for firms and consumers.
43. (A) Choice (A) is correct because this point is located inside the
current production curve, not along the curve. The curve would have to
move left to reach this point, shrinking inward. This would indicate fewer
resources and less production capacity available, which could indicate a
recession.
44. (D) The correct choice is (D) because point E and point D are both
on the same production possibilities curve, so resource availability and
production capacity have not changed and there is no evidence of recession
or economic expansion.
45. (D) The correct choice is (D). If Choice (C) occurs, production
would not change, and all other outcomes would shift the curve to the right.
46. (E) The correct choice is (E) is accurate because a recession is
technically classified by a decline of economic activity in at least two
consecutive quarters.
47. (C) The correct answer is (C). A nation with a mixed economy
often lets the free market handle decisions for most industries and uses a
command approach for selected industries, such as industries related to food
production or national security. Most nations have mixed economies; a

completely free market economy would have no public sector, and a
completely command economy would have no private sector.
48. (D) The correct answer is (D). A ruby is not necessary for survival
while people need water to remain alive, yet a ruby is much more expensive
than a bottle of water. This is the paradox of value. It occurs because rubies
are scarcer than bottles of water, and scarcity results in a higher price.
49. (B) The correct answer is (B), the truck. A truck can be driven
regularly for more than three years, while the other items will wear out or
be used up in less than three years so they are considered nondurable goods.
50. (C) The correct choice is (C), a barter economy. This type of
economy preceded the market economy and is very rare now. Barter
economies can still exist under special conditions, such as when buyers and
sellers wish to evade high taxes or a nation’s currency is experiencing
hyperinflation.
51. (C) The best choice is (C). Marginal utility declines as additional
units of a good are purchased. After buying three cans of soda, the
consumer considers the fourth can less valuable.
52. (B) The best choice is (B). The law of comparative advantage
indicates that France should specialize in producing cheese and Switzerland
should specialize in producing chocolate and both countries should trade
with one another. If a trade embargo stops this exchange, France would
need to produce its own chocolate and Switzerland would need to produce
its own cheese. As a result, France would produce less cheese and
Switzerland would produce less chocolate.
53. (B) The correct choice is (B). A typical production possibility
curve is concave, indicating increasing opportunity costs. As the nation
moves toward maximizing production of one crop, its production of the
other crop falls more rapidly. That isn’t the case here. This lack of
increasing opportunity costs indicates that the nation’s resources are equally
suitable for producing either crop.

54. (E) Choice (E) is the best choice. Specialization creates a concave
shape for the production possibilities curve. Specialization can also increase
total production by making workers and factories more efficient. An
unspecialized economy probably isn’t as productive in overall terms as a
specialized economy.
55. (D) Choice (D) is correct. The bakery can produce either 300
cookies and 140 loaves of bread at point A, or zero cookies and 160 loaves
of bread at point B. Cookie production fell from 300 units to zero, so 300
cookies is the opportunity cost.
56. (C) Choice (C) is correct. At point A the bakery produces 140
loaves of bread, and at point D the bakery produces 80 loaves of bread.
Bread production fell by 60 loaves. Cookie production remained unchanged
at 300 cookies.
57. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. A biased technology improves
production efficiency for only one good. Choice (A) is incorrect because an
economic expansion would increase the maximum production quantity for
cars as well.
58. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer. If resources allocated to bread
and car production do not change, car quantity will remain the same and
bread quantity will increase.
59. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If the spinach quantity doesn’t change
after the biased technology increases the efficiency of spinach production,
the nation must have allocated more resources to lettuce production so the
lettuce quantity will increase.
60. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The law of diminishing marginal utility
states that as a person increases consumption of a good, satisfaction or
utility decreases with each marginal consumption of the good. For example,
say you really liked hot dogs and you started eating them every day. With
consumption of each hot dog, there would come a point where you would
like them less and less.

61. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. Marginal utility is defined as the
additional satisfaction or utility a consumer receives from consuming one
additional unit of a good. Choice (B) is incorrect because it refers to the
marginal revenue cost. Choice (C) is incorrect because it refers to the
marginal propensity to save. Choice (D) is incorrect because it describes
marginal cost. Choice (E) is incorrect because it describes marginal cost.
62. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The law of diminishing marginal
utility states that as a person increases consumption of a good, satisfaction
or utility decreases with each marginal consumption of the good.
63. (B) Item I is not a part of a market system because it describes the
operations of a traditional economy. Item III is not part of a market system
because it describes a command economy. Choice (B) is correct because
Item II describes the interactions between consumers and producers.
64. (E) The correct choice is (E). Tariffs are carried over to consumers
and, as a result, U.S. consumers would likely have to pay for the increase
caused by the tariff.
65. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. Choice (C) is correct, but this
describes the income effect.
66. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. Choice (B) describes the
substitution effect.
67. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. If car manufacturers exited the
market, the price of cars would rise. A higher car price would result in a
lower quantity demanded, but demand for cars would not fall. The other
choices would reduce car demand.
68. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Increased supply would reduce sugar
beet prices, increasing quantity demanded. The other choices would result
in higher demand for sugar beets.
69. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The number of buyers is not a
determinant of supply and the number of producers is not a determinant of

demand, but both factors affect elasticity.
70. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Perceived health benefits would increase
demand for mushrooms, resulting in a higher quantity supplied, but
wouldn’t increase supply.
71. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The demand curve for strawberries
would shift left, resulting in a lower quantity supplied, but supply wouldn’t
change.
72. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Dividing 50 percent by 10 percent
results in a price elasticity of 5, which is greater than 1, so television set
demand is price elastic.
73. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Demand for sunscreen will shift to the
right, but sunscreen supply won’t increase.
74. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Higher supply and higher demand will
increase the equilibrium quantity, but the change in market price can’t be
determined.
75. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Dividing 10 percent by 40 percent
results in a price elasticity of 0.25.
76. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer. All of these regulations could
result in a deadweight loss, creating either a shortage or a surplus in the
market.
77. (C) Choice (C) is correct. If the market equilibrium price and
quantity match, the market does not have an effective price floor/ceiling or
undersupply/oversupply. An ineffective price floor or ceiling could still be
present though.
78. (D) The best answer is Choice (D), because the buyer is willing to
pay less for each additional apple. While Choice (B) and Choice (E) would
result in the same total price for three apples, these answers provide no
evidence of declining utility.

79. (B) The correct choice is (B). Tariffs are generally defined as a tax
on foreign products that then carries over to domestic consumers. Because
domestic consumers have to pay this added cost, this results in deadweight
costs.
80. (D) The correct choice is (D). Because 10 percent of $80 is $8, this
means that the total price of oil once a tariff has been placed on it is $88.
81. (C) The correct choice is (C). This is the most precise response, as
any quantitative restrictions to trade are considered to be quotas.
82. (A) The correct choice is (A). Assuming that a consumer is
perfectly rational, he or she would make the decision based on the largest
increase to the consumer’s total utility.
83. (D) The correct choice is (D). This choice best reflects an example
of a sunk cost, as this is a cost the company needs to do regardless of the
level of output it has. It is also something the company cannot recover.
84. (B) The correct choice is (B). Because the opportunity is the cost
of a missed opportunity, company B is a better option than company A.

Chapter 2
85. (A) According to the law of demand, all else being equal, when the
price of a good or service increases, the quantity demanded decreases.
Choice (A) is the best answer because it is the inverse of the question being
asked.
86. (B) Choice (B) is correct because a normal good is a good that
increases in demand as income increases. Since Michael received an
increase in his yearly salary, there was an increase in demand for steak, and
steak is an expensive meat product, it is a normal good. Choice (A) is
incorrect because an inferior good is a good for which demand decreases as
income increases. Choice (E) is incorrect because eating steak is not a

necessity. Choices (C) and (D) are incorrect because eating steak does not
affect the determinants of supply and demand.
87. (D) Choice (D) is correct. An inferior good is a good for which
demand decreases as income increases. Since Peter received an increase in
salary, he can afford better shoes than thrift-store-bought shoes.
88. (E) Choice (E) is correct. Tin is a factor of production used in the
production of guitar strings. Firms will produce more guitar strings if the
costs related to the production of the product decrease. If the price of tin
decreases, then producers are willing and able to produce more because of a
decrease in a factor of production.
89. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Remember that people will buy more of
a good if the price is low and less of a good if the price is high. This
illustrates an inverse relationship. According to the law of demand and all
else being equal, when the price of a good or service increases, the quantity
demanded decreases.
90. (B) The question asks for only the quantity supplied, so any
question that refers to price may be eliminated. Choice (B) is the best
answer because if the price of a good increases, its substitutes will
experience an increase in the quantity demanded.
91. (B) The correct choice is (B) because according to the law of
demand, if the price of figs increases, consumers will demand fewer figs.
92. (E) Tennis rackets and tennis balls are complementary goods. You
cannot use a tennis racket without tennis balls. Therefore, if the price of one
good increases or decreases, the price of the complementary good increases
or decreases. Choice (E) is the best answer because it illustrates the
complementary effect.
93. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Chicken is a normal good. Remember
that a normal good is a good that increases in demand as income increases.
If the demand curve for chicken shifted to the left, then consumer income
would show an overall decrease.

94. (C) Choice (C) is correct. If the price of hot dogs increases, then
the price of hot dog buns will increase as well.
95. (B) Choice (B) is correct. All else being equal, in a free market
system, the price of a good or service is determined at the equilibrium point
where supply and demand intersect.
96. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The graph represents the inverse relation
stated in the law of demand. The graph represents movement from point B
to point A. This illustrates that the quantity demanded decreased because of
an increase in price.
97. (C) Choice (C) is correct. If the price of a key ingredient decreases,
then the cost of production will decrease. This will lead Doherty Industries
to offer more of the product at all possible price levels. This illustrates the
law of supply.
98. (E) Choice (E) is correct. The producer would gain more revenue
by raising the price for an inelastic good. For example, if the gasoline price
increased 20 percent and quantity demanded fell 10 percent, gasoline would
be inelastic and the revenue from higher-priced gasoline would outweigh
sales lost because of the higher price. If the price increased 20 percent and
quantity demanded did not change, the good would be considered perfectly
inelastic.
99. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Most necessity goods are price inelastic.
100. (B) The elasticity formula is percent change in quantity divided
by percent change in price. If the answer is greater than 1, the good is said
to be price sensitive, or elastic.
If the answer is less than 1, the good is said not to be price sensitive.
Therefore, Choice (B) is the best answer because 40/10 = 4.
101. (D) Refer to question 69. Therefore, Choice (D) is the best answer
because 0/30 = 0.

102. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Sally’s income decreased and her
demand for canned vegetables increased as a result, so canned vegetables
are an inferior good.
103. (B) The movement from D1 to D2 represents an increase in
demand. Choice (B) is the best answer because a decrease in the price of a
substitute good would decrease demand for this product and increase
demand for the substitute good.
104. (A) The movement from S1 to S2 represents a decrease in supply.
Choice (A) is the best answer; if the price of a key ingredient to the
production of the product decreased, then production would increase
because of a decrease in the costs of production.
105. (D) A price ceiling refers to the maximum price at which a
producer is allowed to sell a good or service. This is usually instituted by
law from the government and helps ensure fair business practices. An
effective price ceiling is set at a point below the equilibrium price.
106. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because over a longer period of
time, producers have a better chance to adjust to a change in price: hire
more workers and build more plants. Over time, elasticity of supply will be
greater.
107. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Consumer surplus is measured by
calculating the difference between what consumers are willing and able to
pay for a good or service and its relative market price. A surplus occurs if
the consumer is willing to pay more than the market price for a good or
service.
108. (C) Because fertilizer is a factor of production for grapes,
production costs for grapes will increase and thus Choice (C) is correct; the
supply of grapes will decrease.
109. (A) Choice (A) is correct. An increase in demand will signal to
suppliers to raise the prices of their products. If demand rises, then suppliers
will raise their prices and a higher quantity will be sold.

110. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Since there was an increase in price for
product X, a decrease in demand should result. If the demand for product Z
increases as a result of an increase in the price of product X, then product Z
is a substitute good.
111. (B) Choice (B) is correct. A price ceiling refers to the maximum
price at which a producer is allowed to sell a good or service. This is
usually instituted by law from the government and helps to ensure fair
business practices. If credit card companies are regulated to institute a
maximum amount on how much interest they can charge, then it is a price
ceiling.
112. (B) Choice (B) is correct. A shortage is defined as a situation
where the quantity demanded exceeds the quantity supplied. More and more
people are demanding a particular good, but producers do not have an
adequate supply of the good.
113. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because it reflects the law of
supply: producers are more willing and able to produce more of a good as
price increases.
114. (B) The correct choice is (B). The point where the supply and
demand curve intersect is called market equilibrium.
115. (C) The correct choice is (C). If the price of a complementary
good decreased, this good may be seen as more valuable and thus the
demand curve would shift to the right. This would result in a new point of
market equilibrium that would be shifted to the right. All of the other
remaining answer choices would shift the demand curve to the left.
116. (D) Choice (D) is correct. A surplus exists when the quantity
supplied is greater than the quantity demanded. A surplus is another way of
saying there is an excess of supply. Choice (B) is incorrect because the
equilibrium point is the intersection between supply and demand, where the
supply equals the demand. Choice (C) is incorrect because it refers to the
percentage of income distribution in a society.

117. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Establishing an effective price floor will
create a market surplus because suppliers will produce more than
consumers demand. If a market surplus already exists, the size of the
surplus will increase.
118. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because if there are too few
substitutes and little time for changes to production to be made, then
demand is said to be inelastic. Therefore, substitutes and time are
determinants of elasticity.
119. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The supply of wheat increases, so if
demand doesn’t change, the wheat price falls. With inexpensive wheat on
the market serving as a substitute good for corn, the corn price also falls.
120. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The elasticity formula is percent
change in quantity divided by percent change in price. If the answer is
greater than 1, the good is said to be price sensitive. If the answer is less
than 1, the good is said not to be price sensitive. Because 4/2 = 2, the good
would be price elastic.
121. (D) Choice (D) is correct. An increase in demand for hamburgers
shifts the demand curve for buns to the right and the price of buns rises.
122. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Deadweight loss refers to the lost net
benefit to society caused by a movement from competitive market
equilibrium. When price increases above the equilibrium because of taxes, a
deadweight loss occurs.
123. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Deadweight loss refers to the lost net
benefit to society caused by a movement from competitive market
equilibrium. When the quantity produced is above the market equilibrium
quantity, deadweight loss occurs.
124. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The price elasticity formula is percent
change in quantity divided by percent change in price. If the answer is
greater than 1, the good is said to be price sensitive. If the answer is less
than 1, the good is said not to be price sensitive. However, if the answer is

zero, then the demand is completely independent from the price. Consumers
will purchase the good regardless of the price.
125. (B) Choice (B) is correct. If joint demand exists for two goods,
they are complementary goods.
126. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The price increase for bell peppers
would shift the demand curve for artichokes to the right. A demand shift
from D1 to D2 is a move to the right, and the other choices are moves to the
left.
127. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A price drop for tomatoes causes a
larger shift in artichoke demand, so tomatoes are a better substitute for
artichokes.
128. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because a consumer surplus is
the difference between what a consumer is willing and able to pay and the
actual market price. If the consumer was willing to pay more for the
product than the established market price, then there is a consumer surplus.
129. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer because establishing an
ineffective price ceiling will not influence quantity demanded or supplied. It
only ensures that producers will not exceed a specific price for their
product, thus protecting consumers.
130. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If the supply curve for grape jelly shifts
to the right, the price of grape jelly will fall. This will increase demand for
peanut butter because it is a complementary good.
131. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer because the complement effect
refers to an increase or decrease in demand for a product that works with
another product. For example, if the demand for tennis rackets increases, so
will the demand for tennis balls. This reflects a direct relationship, whereas
all the other choices reflect an inverse relationship.
132. (D) Choice (D) is correct. An increase in technology is a major
change in the factors of production. If technology increases, then

production output will increase as well. This will result in greater profits.
However, since this is a perfectly competitive market, price will remain the
same.
133. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Tacos are a better substitute for
burritos, so the cross-price elasticity of demand will be higher.
134. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because if a firm is utilizing its
resources to allocative efficiency, then price (P) will equal marginal cost
(MC). Keep in mind the opposite notion: since monopolies are notoriously
inefficient, they operate where P is greater than MC.
135. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Corn oil is less substitutable for olive
oil so its cross-price elasticity of demand will be lower.
136. (C) Price elasticity of demand is extremely useful because it helps
firms and economists predict consumer behavior if there is a change in
price. Choice (C) is the best answer.
137. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Remember, an effective price ceiling
will always be demarcated below the market equilibrium price on a supplyand-demand chart.
138. (A) Calculating the cross-elasticity refers to the measurement
taken of how sensitive the consumption of one good is to the change in
price of another good. Choice (A) is the best answer.
139. (B) The correct choice is (B) because the income effect describes
the relationship between income and demand: as a person’s income
increases or decreases, it will increase or decrease demand for a product.
Choice (A) is incorrect because it describes the substitution effect. Choice
(C) is incorrect because it describes marginal utility. Choices (D) and (E)
are incorrect because they are not related to the income effect.
140. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A price increase from $1 to $1.25 is a
25 percent increase. Quantity demanded fell 50 percent. 50%/25% = 2,
which is above 1, so demand for golf balls is elastic.

141. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The price fell 40 percent and train
ridership (quantity demanded) rose 20 percent. 20%/40% = 0.5, which is
below 1, so demand for train tickets is inelastic.
142. (C) The correct choice is (C). All of the remaining answer
choices are very elastic goods, while it is very difficult to find a substitute
for insulin.
143. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. Demand for Giffen goods does
increase when the price rises, but Giffen goods are inferior goods. Veblen
goods are luxury goods used for conspicuous consumption. Consumers buy
them to show off their wealth. Thus, a luxury handbag is a Veblen good if a
higher price results in higher demand.
144. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. If an inferior good is a
necessity and substitutes are not available, a worker may demand more of
the inferior good and fewer normal goods if the price of the inferior good
increases. For example, the shoe store worker could buy more rice and give
up hot sauce used to season the rice. Therefore, the income effect affects
demand more strongly than the substitution effect, indicating the presence
of a Giffen good.
145. (B) Choice (B) is correct. If a perfect substitute is available for a
good, increasing the price of the good will cause quantity demanded to fall
to zero.
146. (A) The correct choice is (A). Only oil would be considered
inelastic, as the value of elasticity is lower than 1. In all of the remaining
answer choices, the value is higher than 1, making them unit elastic.
147. (B) Choice (B) is correct. If fewer substitute products were
available, the demand curve would shift to the right, not the left.
148. (E) Choice (E) is correct. The first four factors would reduce
production costs, shifting the supply curve to the right.

149. (A) The correct choice is (A). Unit elastic supply occurs when a
change in the supply provided causes an equally corresponding change in
the price.
150. (B) The correct choice is (B). As supply is unit elastic, it is clear
that a 10 percent increase in quantity would result in the price increasing by
10 percent.
151. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. In a market economy without
rent control laws, apartments supplied would equal apartments demanded at
point C. Rent control laws would cause apartments supplied to decrease
toward A2, while apartments demanded would increase toward B2.
Applicants would outnumber available rental units, resulting in a housing
shortage.
152. (A) The size of a deadweight loss can be calculated by measuring
the area between quantity demanded, quantity supplied, and equilibrium
price/quantity. Choice (A) is correct, the deadweight loss caused by a
housing shortage would be represented by the area inside the triangle
bounded by points A2, B2, and C.
153. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The supply curve will shift to
the left and a smaller quantity will be sold at higher prices.
154. (B) The best choice is (B). A price floor will have no effect if it’s
set below the equilibrium price.
155. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Producer surplus is the area to the left
of the supply curve and below the price equilibrium. The area above the
price equilibrium and to the left of the demand curve is consumer surplus.
156. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. If consumers expect lower auto
prices, demand shifts to the left.
157. (C) Choice (C) is correct. If consumers expect higher auto prices,
demand shifts to the right.

158. (C) The correct choice is (C) is the only one where the value of
the elasticity of demand is equal to 1. In such a case, demand is unit elastic,
and increase in the quantity demanded is equal to the price.
159. (D) The correct choice is (D). Most of the answer choices are
related to trade, while a price floor is the minimal price mandated by the
government that can be set. A common example is the minimum wage.
160. (B) Choice (B) is correct. If the price falls below the intervention
price, the government begins buying goods in the market. This shifts the
demand curve to the right.
161. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Dividing a 40 percent increase by a 20
percent increase results in a cross-price demand elasticity of 2. This result
indicates that tomatoes and lettuce are substitute goods.
162. (B) Choice (B) is correct. If quantity demanded for blackberry
jam divided by 20 percent equals –2, then quantity demanded must be –40
percent. This result indicates that blackberry jam and peanut butter are
complementary goods.
163. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The price floor causes the price to shift
from the equilibrium point to the point where the supply curve meets line
A, resulting in a surplus. The size of the surplus is the area of the triangle
bounded by the points where line A crosses the supply and demand curves
and the equilibrium price point. This is considered a deadweight loss.
164. (B) Choice (B) is correct. A price ceiling represented by line B
would result in a shortage represented by the area above line B and between
the supply and demand curves. This is considered a deadweight loss.
165. (B) Choice (B) is correct. If the price of chicken increases 10
percent and cross-price elasticity of demand is 5, then quantity demanded
for pork will increase 50 percent. The new quantity demanded for pork will
be 10 + (10 × 50 percent), or 15.

166. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Dividing –20 percent by 50 percent
results in cross-price demand elasticity of –0.4. Thus, bread and cheese are
complementary goods.
167. (C) Choice (C) is correct. If the corn price rose 40 percent and
cross-price elasticity of demand is 0.75, quantity demanded for wheat rose
by 30 percent. If the new quantity demanded is 13, then the original
quantity demanded was 10.
168. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Quantity demanded increased from 50
to 80, which is a 60 percent increase. Dividing 60 percent by 30 percent
results in a price elasticity of demand of 2. These are substitute goods.
169. (E) Choice (E) is correct. Quantity supplied fell 15 percent and
price fell 30 percent, so price elasticity of supply for peaches is 0.5.
170. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The fashion retailer can easily
adjust output, but the motorcycle manufacturer needs more time to adjust
output. Thus, price elasticity of supply will be low for the fashion retailer
and high for the motorcycle manufacturer.
171. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. According to the law of supply,
quantity supplied should decrease because suppliers will be less willing to
produce the good.
172. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Income elasticity of demand is the
percentage change in quantity demanded divided by the percentage change
in income.
173. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. The increased health care costs
are an example of a negative externality resulting from increased soda
demand. There is no evidence that production costs decreased or the
government regulated the price of soda.
174. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Choice (C), consumer expectations, is a
determinant of demand as well.

175. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The quantity of apples supplied doubles
from 10 to 20 when the price doubles from $0.75 to $1.50, so apple supply
is unitary elastic.
176. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Income elasticity of demand for
oatmeal is –15 percent divided by 30 percent, or –0.5.
177. (A) Choice (A) is correct. When income elasticity of demand is
zero, the good is a sticky good.
178. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The formula for the tax paid by the
consumer is PES divided by (PES minus PED). This is 0.6/(0.6 − –0.2), or
0.6/0.8, which comes out to 0.75. Since the tax was $50, the consumer pays
$50 × 0.75, or $37.50.
179. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The formula is 0.6/(0.6 − –0.4). This
equals 0.6/1.0, or 0.6, so the car buyer pays 60 percent of the tariff.
180. (B) The correct choice is (B). This would represent an expansion
of supply where both the price and quantity were increased.
181. (C) The correct choice is (C). This is the only choice that would
cause an increase in the price on the existing curve. (A), (C), and (D) would
result in a shift of the curve, while a lower quantity could only move a point
lower down along the existing curve.
182. (C) The truck manufacturer absorbs a percentage of the tax
increase equal to –PED/(PES - PED). In this example, the percentage is 1.0
(1.5 - –1.0), or 1.0/2.5, which is equal to 0.4. Because 0.4 × $10,000 =
$4,000, Choice (C) is correct.
183. (C) The best answer is (C), reduce wages. If supply is inelastic
and demand is elastic, a manufacturer can’t force buyers to pay the tax by
raising prices. The manufacturer would have to absorb the tax hike by
reducing other expenses, such as wages.

184. (E) The correct choice is (E). As this is movement along the same
supply curve, the only factor that could have caused this decrease is a
change in the price of the product, which also causes a shift in the quantity
supplied.
185. (D) The correct choice is (D). This is the only option that would
actually cause an increased quantity, as (A) and (B) would only cause shifts
along the existing curve. On the other hand, (C) and (E) would shift the
supply curve to the left.
186. (A) The correct choice is (A). While the remaining elements
mentioned in the scenario are all integral elements of a perfectly
competitive market, one of the main assumptions of this market structure is
that all companies produce identical products.
187. (D) The correct choice is (D). A perfectly competitive market is
one where the price would be determined by a fair market equilibrium. This
is shown only in market D.

Chapter 3
188. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Economies of scale refers to the
downward part of the long-run average total cost (LRAC) curve where
LRAC falls as plant size rises; constant returns to scale refers to changes in
output by the same proportion as a change in input; and diseconomies of
scale refers to the upward sloping part of the LRAC where firms see an
increase in marginal cost as output increases. Choice (A) is the best answer
because it reflects these definitions.
189. (E) The correct choice is (E). All of these answer choices are
considered by accounting profit.
190. (C) The correct choice is (C). The third worker can generate a
marginal return of 11 additional chairs.

191. (D) The correct choice is (D). The final answer can be received
by deducting all of the values from revenue aside from the cost of accepting
another project. This is an example of opportunity costs and is not
considered by accounting profit.
192. (D) The correct choice is (D). Variable costs are those that change
as output increases. As rent is a fixed cost, the answer is $5,000 multiplied
by five cars, which equals $25,000.
193. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The law of diminishing returns states
that as more and more units are added to production, there is a point where
the marginal revenue product declines. In the short run, marginal cost is
low, but as more and more is produced, marginal cost increases.
194. (C) Choices (A), (B), (D), and (E) are all variable production
inputs because they can easily be influenced and changed in the short run.
Choice (C) is the best answer because human capital refers to the skills and
education a worker brings to the production of a product. This is not as
easily manipulated by producers in a firm.
195. (C) Choice (C) is correct. This question is very straightforward. If
a variable production input—an input that is not a part of fixed costs—
increases, then the marginal cost will increase as well. For example,
suppose a plant adds a new machine that uses more electricity than the other
machines in the plant. This is an increase in the factors of production, and
the firm will respond by increasing the price of the product to cover the
additional cost in electricity.
196. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Economic profit is the difference
between total revenue and total economic cost. Economic profit
incorporates opportunity costs, whereas accounting profit does not.
197. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Diseconomies of scale exist on the
upward sloping part of the LRAC curve. In the long run, firms see
increasing costs as production increases.

198. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer. Constant returns to scale refers
to changes in output by the same proportion as a change in input. It is the
point between economies of scale and diseconomies of scale.
199. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. Economies of scale refers to an
increase in the efficiency of a production as production levels increase.
Choice (A) is incorrect because specialization usually does not result in a
decrease in profits. Choice (C) is incorrect because specialization coincides
with a decrease in production costs. Choice (D) is incorrect because both
changes in input are the same as a change in output, so it tends to be a
straight line on the LRAC curve. Choice (E) is incorrect because
diseconomies of scale refers to an increase in marginal cost when
production increases.
200. (A) The correct choice is (A). The company can continue
operating, as its marginal revenue is $3 higher than its marginal costs.
201. (A) Choice (A) is correct. In general, economists say that firms do
not go out of business in the short run. They must pay their fixed costs.
However, firms may shut down and not pay their variable costs. If Mr. Ray
is considering shutting down his business, then the two most important
factors he should analyze are average variable cost (AVC) and marginal
revenue (MR). The firm will remain open if MR = AVC or MR > AVC. If
marginal revenue, the same as price, is equal to average variable costs, then
firms could shut down and pay only their fixed costs. If MR < AVC, then
firms may shut down.
202. (B) Choice (B) is correct. At the point where price is greater than
average total costs, more firms will enter the market because of the
attractiveness of the business venture. This is so because both fixed and
variable costs are being covered by the price. As a result, prices will go
down as more and more firms enter the market. Remember, in a perfectly
competitive market, economic profit in the long run is zero.
203. (E) Choice (E) is correct. If an owner of a firm is trying to decide
whether to shut down, then analyzing marginal revenue (MR) and average

variable cost (AVC) will help. The firm will stay open if MR = AVC or MR
> AVC. If marginal revenue, the same as price, is equal to average variable
costs, then firms could shut down and pay only their fixed costs. If MR <
AVC, then firms may shut down.
204. (A) Choice (A) is correct. In any competitive market, the profitmaximizing point is where MR = MC. If MR is greater than MC, then the
firm would make a profit. If MC is greater than MR, then the firm would be
losing money.
205. (D) A perfectly competitive firm in the long run shows a profit of
zero after more and more firms enter the market. Choice (D) is the best
choice because as more and more firms enter the market, and existing
markets adjust their size, the price will decrease and all firms will only be
making a normal profit.
206. (D) If new firms enter a market, the firms already competing in
the market will lose market power, so Choice (D) is the best answer.
207. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A perfect competition is a market
structure where many firms are producing very similar products, prices are
established through supply and demand, and there is freedom to enter and
exit the market.
208. (E) The correct choice is (E). When average variable costs is
equal to marginal revenue, the most profitable option for the company is to
cease operations.
209. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The goal of any firm is to make a profit
with the products it is producing and selling. In a perfectly competitive
market, there are no barriers to entry into the market. When a product is
profitable for a perfectly competitive firm, it exists only in the short run. In
the long run, profits are zero because of other firms entering the market.
210. (C) If more and more firms are exiting the market, then costs
must be greater than price. Choice (C) is the best answer because it shows

that price is less than average total cost (ATC) in a perfectly competitive
market structure.
211. (B) When most people say the word profit, they are referring to
accounting profit, calculated as the difference between total revenue and
total explicit cost. Economic profit, however, calculates the opportunity cost
(implicit cost). Choice (B) is the best answer.
212. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer because the diagram illustrates
price equal to marginal revenue. This is true in a perfect competition.
213. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because at any other level the
firm runs the possibility of producing too much or too little, which would
raise revenue or incur a cost.
214. (E) Choice (E) is correct. Remember that for all market
structures, the profit-maximizing point is where MR = MC.
215. (A) The correct choice is (A). All of the other claims are not
accurate. Monopolistic competition and perfect competition are structures
with a significant number of competitors, but companies in a monopolistic
competition have some level of market power.
216. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A normal profit is described as another
way of saying a firm is earning an economic profit of zero. It earned the
same amount that it would earn from the next best use of its resources, so it
also earned an economic profit. This is because normal profit and economic
profit consider opportunity costs.
217. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because if producing a product
is profitable, more and more firms will enter the market because of the ease
of entry. Remember, in the long run, the economic profits of a perfectly
competitive firm will be zero.
218. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer because MR = MC represents
the profit-maximizing point for all market structures. If a firm is operating
at this point, then all resources are being utilized efficiently.

219. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer because it describes price
leadership, where one firm is a leader among its competitors and sets the
market price, and others will follow along because they wish to hold on to
their market share. This is very true for oligopolies.
220. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Remember, the profit-maximizing point
will always be MR = MC for any market structure, even a cartel.
221. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because a restriction to how
many firms enter the market would allow a greater opportunity for profit.
Choices (B) and (E) are incorrect because the opposite is true because of
barriers to entry. Choice (C) is incorrect because price discrimination is
unrelated. Choice (D) is incorrect because it is unrelated.
222. (B) Remember that a perfectly competitive firm in the long run
will have economic profits of zero. Normal profit will equal economic
profit.
223. (C) The correct choice is (C). This is the only answer choice that
reflects the concept of economies of scale. One of the reasons this can
happen is that the company can specialize its workers or integrate more
advanced technology to boost production.
224. (D) Choice (D) is correct. In any market structure, the profitmaximizing point is where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. In a
perfectly competitive market, price will equal marginal revenue. Choice (A)
is incorrect, although deceiving, because only in the long run will a perfect
competition have a zero profit. This is because more and more firms enter
the market, cutting price and profit. Choice (B) is incorrect because the
question shows that the firm is profit maximizing and would result in more
firms entering, not leaving, the market. Choice (C) is incorrect because this
is a business tactic of an oligopoly.
225. (A) In any market structure the profit-maximizing point is where
marginal revenue equals marginal cost. Choice (B) is incorrect because if
the revenue product of labor (MRP) is less than the wages paid to workers,
then the firm will respond by laying off workers. Choice (C) is incorrect

because average fixed costs are costs that must be paid regardless if the firm
is making a profit or losing money. Choice (D) is incorrect because
economic decisions are not followed through if the marginal cost is greater
than the marginal benefit.
226. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Rubber is a variable production input,
not a capital good included in fixed costs, so a change in its price doesn’t
affect fixed costs.
227. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Joe is earning an accounting profit of
$40,000 but would earn $50,000 as an engineer, so he incurs an economic
loss of $10,000.
228. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. In the second year, the shoe
store is earning zero economic profit because Joe’s profit as an owner
equals the wage he would earn at a company. Thus, the market has likely
reached long-run equilibrium.
229. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The furniture company achieved
economies of scale by opening up the second plant because its first plant
became more profitable as well.
230. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. The auto manufacturer earns
$300,000 from three plants, so each plant produces $100,000 in profit. Its
first plant was producing $100,000 in profit by itself, so the auto
manufacturer achieved constant returns to scale.
231. (B) Choice (C) is correct. Competition ensures that prices will be
controlled through the market forces of supply and demand. If a monopoly
exists, that firm may set a much higher price than in a perfectly competitive
market. If competition exists, then it will increase the total welfare and
benefit society.
232. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. The auto parts manufacturer
achieved economies of scale. It also achieved increasing returns to scale, so
Choices (D) and (E) are incorrect.

233. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Economic profit is equal to accounting
profit minus the profit that would be earned if resources (in this case, the
owner’s skills) were put to the next best possible use.
234. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The next best possible use of Nate’s
skills pays $80,000 so opening a restaurant that earns an economic profit of
$60,000 results in an economic profit of –$20,000, or an economic loss.
235. (C) The correct choice is (C). As per-unit costs consistently
increased, it is clear that the company was becoming less effective in
producing the good, meaning this is an example of diseconomies of scale.
236. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. If P < ATC, firms won’t earn a
profit. A perfectly competitive market has low exit barriers, so firms will
exit the market and the price will rise.
237. (D) The correct choice is (D). This would be an example of a
monopsony, as the teachers do not really have other realistic opportunities
(aside from those that were eliminated by the question prompt) to find other
sources of income. As a single entity, the local government has strong
control over this aspect of the market, so this would be a monopsony.
238. (D) Choice (D) is correct. The difference between market price
($40,000) and the price the automaker will accept for the car ($30,000) is
$10,000.
239. (E) Choice (E) is correct. Consumer surplus is the price the
consumer is willing to pay for a banana ($2.60) minus the market price of a
banana ($2.25) which is $0.35.
240. (A) Choice (A) is correct. For the raspberry farm, MR = MC at
$5. Thus, it should increase production to that output level to maximize
profit. It should not increase production until MC equals the market price of
$6 because MC would rise above MR if that were to happen.
241. (C) The correct choice is (C). Specialization would help minimize
production costs. There is no guarantee that just changing the quantity of

employees would have any impact, and a lump-sum subsidy would not
make changes in the long run if not properly implemented.
242. (E) The correct choice is (E). As an increase in the value of
money invested always is consistently 50 percent, this corresponds to a 50
percent increase in investment. This is an example of a consistent return to
scale.
243. (C) The correct choice is (C). As it can be clearly calculated that
an increase always results in a 20 percent increase, increasing investments
from $1,200 to $1,400 would result in an increase in the number of wines
produced of 20 percent. The value of the increase is 2.4, meaning that the
total number of wines produced would be 14.4.
244. (D) The correct choice is (D). Deadweight costs occur when the
price is kept artificially high through the monopolist or a cartel setting the
price of the product. The difference between the price set by either the
monopolist or the oligopoly compared with the market price is the
deadweight cost for each of these markets.
245. (A) The correct choice is (A). The minimum efficient scale, often
abbreviated as MES, is considered to be the lowest level on the cost curve
on which the company can produce a product at a competitive price.
246. (A) The correct choice is (A). At the level of one production
plant, the company can earn $20,000 times 100, which equals $2,000,000.
When deducting the cost of opening the plant from this value, its profit is
still $500,000. Despite the fact that the company could theoretically make
more cars with a rising number of plants, the costs outweigh the benefits.
For example, with five production plants, the company would earn
$4,200,000, but it would cost the company $6,000,000 just to open that
many plants, so it would be operating with a loss of $1,800,000.
247. (B) The correct choice is (B). When the production function is
marked by diminishing returns, the marginal cost curve will be upward
sloping.

248. (C) The correct choice is (C). When you are calculating the levels
of profit for each worker, consider that the profit the company can earn with
one worker is 20 × 80 - 800, which equals $800. The corresponding levels
of profit, using the same procedure as just described, are $600 for two
workers, $1,600 for three workers, $3,000 for four workers, and $4,800 for
five workers. Given these facts, it is clear that the least the company can
make is if it hires two workers, at which point it will only earn $600, as
reflected in (C).
249. (B) The correct choice is (B). This is the only accurate response,
as this is a defining characteristic of a perfectly competitive market in
which there are many competitors and low barriers to entry. This results in
no companies’ making an economic profit in the long run.
250. (A) The correct choice is (A). The law of diminishing returns
shows that the marginal use of each additional worker decreases over time,
so an increase of less than three (the marginal return preceding it) would be
ideal.
251. (A) The correct choice is (A). Economic profit is gained by
deducting all of the costs, including implicit costs. This means that the costs
of financial capital and opportunity would also be considered. When
deducting all of these values from revenue, you will find that the final result
is $19,000. (B), $30,000, is the accounting profit of the company, which
does not take into account the implicit costs of doing business.
252. (E) The correct choice is (E). This is the most accurate response,
as perfect competition is generally characterized by companies being unable
to make profit in the long run, while a few companies working together to
keep the price high is an essential trait of oligopolies.
253. (E) The correct choice is (E). Because a perfect competition
would lead to a large number of companies competing, this would likely
drive down the price of the product.
254. (C) The correct choice is (C). Companies primarily make such
decisions by considering whether they are making an economic profit, as

this accounts for both their implicit and explicit costs. If a company is
making an economic loss, it is likely that it may decide to shut down its
operations.
255. (D) The correct choice is (D). In a perfectly competitive market,
there are no barriers to entry and companies are price takers who have to
accept the market price.
256. (C) The correct choice is (C). Neither revenue nor accounting
profit are actually relevant to showing whether any of these market
structures are a perfectly competitive market. The key element is that
economic profit is $0 for market C, which is what companies make in the
long run in a perfectly competitive market.
257. (C) The correct choice is (C). Colluding to keep the price higher
than fair market conditions is a trait of an oligopoly, and this is specifically
not possible in a market that is perfectly competitive.
258. (B) The correct choice is (B). Economic profit can be calculated
by considering revenue and then subtracting all of the implicit and explicit
costs of doing business. Failing to sign a contract with a client and the cost
of financial capital are implicit costs of doing business, so while the
accounting profit is $40,500, economic profit is equal to $34,000.
259. (B) The correct choice is (B). The owner losing time filling his
tax returns is an implicit cost of doing business that is measured by
economic profit by economic profit but not by accounting profit. Therefore,
accounting profit would be worth $2,500 more than economic profit.
260. (A) The correct choice is (A). Prior to the companies’
implementing these changes, its per-unit costs of production were
decreasing as it opened new plants. The scenario makes it clear that
overcrowding by adding redundant production lines caused an increase in
the per-unit cost, which can be characterized as a decreasing return to scale.
261. (C) The correct choice is (C). Labor costs include the costs of
both full-time and part-time employees, so Jim’s total labor costs are

$24,000. When dividing this value by 3, you find that the result is that Jim’s
marketing costs are $8,000.
262. (C) The correct choice is (C). All of the costs mentioned in the
table, aside from the cost of Jim not paying himself as the owner a salary,
are explicit costs and should be deducted from the total value of the
revenue. By including all of these costs, the total accounting profit will
equal $33,000.
263. (A) The correct choice is (A). Because the wine manufacturer is
the only buyer, this would make this type of market structure a monopsony.
264. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The apple farm would lose its
customers if it raised the price of apples because its apples are a commodity.
The apple farm can sell all of its apples, so cutting the price wouldn’t
improve sales; MC should already equal MR. A unique apple cultivar
would be a differentiated product, resulting in monopolistic competition
instead of perfect competition, which would give the apple firm an
opportunity to earn an economic profit.
265. (D) Choice (D) is correct. The equilibrium price and quantity can
be calculated with algebra. The quantity supplied will equal quantity
demanded at equilibrium, and the supply price will equal the demand price.
Let 10 + 4Q = 80 – 3Q, then 10 = Q.
P = 10 + (4 × 10) = 50.
266. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Let 80 + 6Q = 400 – 10Q. Then 16Q =
320, so Q = 20. P = 80 + (6 × 20) = 200.
267. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Lower supply and lower demand will
reduce equilibrium quantity, but the change in market price can’t be
determined.
268. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The price of an input fell, which will
increase supply. Demand also fell. This will result in a lower market price,
but the change in equilibrium quantity can’t be determined.

269. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The equilibrium price and quantity can
be calculated with algebra. The quantity supplied will equal quantity
demanded at equilibrium, and the supply price will equal the demand price.
Let 575 + 8Q = 920 – 15Q, then 345 = 23Q, so Q = 15. P = 575 + (8 × 15)
= 695.
270. (A) Let 1,000 + 3Q = 5,000 – 5Q. Then 8Q = 4,000, so Q = 50. P
= 1,000 + (3 × 50) = 1,150.
271. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If the supply curve for apples shifted to
the right and the demand curve for apples shifted to the left, the equilibrium
price for apples would decrease.
272. (D) Choice (D) is correct. If the supply curve for pears shifted to
the right and the demand curve for pears shifted to the right as well, the
equilibrium quantity of pears would increase.
273. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If an effective price floor was
established for grapes, quantity supplied would be more than quantity
demanded.
274. (B) The correct choice is (B). This is the only answer that
contains both of the accurate values. Fixed costs are $65,000, while variable
costs are $750 × 100, which equals $75,000. This means that total costs are
$140,000.
275. (D) The correct choice is (D). When several companies work to
set the market price, this is evidence of an oligopoly. When a market has
only one buyer, by definition this is an example of a monopsony.
276. (E) The correct choice is (E). 0.1 percent of $200,000 is $200.
Marginal revenue can best be defined as the value of an additional unit of
vaccine that Floyd Pharmaceuticals sells.

Chapter 4

277. (C) Choice (C) is correct. In a monopolistic competition, product
differentiation is utilized to make a product stand out from its competitors.
For example, there are many similarities between iPhone and Galaxy
smartphones, but there are very subtle differences that appeal to different
consumers.
278. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. Regulators may require
average cost pricing in exchange for granting a natural monopoly to a firm.
279. (B) Choice (B) is correct. A monopolistic competition refers to a
market structure with many firms producing a differentiated product with
easy entry into the market. Choice (A) is wrong because it refers to a
natural monopoly. Choice (C) is incorrect because it refers to an oligopoly.
Choice (D) is incorrect because it refers to a perfect competition. Choice
(E) is incorrect because it refers to a monopoly.
280. (C) Choice (C) is correct. An oligopoly is a market structure in
which there are a small number of interdependent firms producing either a
standardized or differentiated product with barriers to entry. Firms in an
oligopoly have significant pricing power. Choice (A) is incorrect because it
refers to a natural monopoly. Choice (B) is incorrect because it refers to a
monopoly. Choice (D) is incorrect because it refers to a monopolistic
competition. Choice (E) is incorrect because it refers to a perfect
competition.
281. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. Monopolistic competition
allows firms to earn short-run economic profits but not long-run economic
profits.
282. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The movie theater is using price
discrimination to maximize profit by setting different ticket prices for two
groups of customers.
283. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A monopoly is a market structure in
which one firm is the producer for a good or service with very few
substitutes and many barriers to entry. There is virtually no competition in a
monopoly market structure.

284. (E) The correct choice is (E). When there is an oligopoly, there is
usually some coordination between the few companies to maintain high
prices.
285. (D) The correct choice is (D). Any monopoly that occurs through
market-allowed means is an example of a natural monopoly.
286. (D) If the price of a good increases, consumers lose purchasing
power. If the good is a significant part of a consumer’s income or budget,
then a change in price will be greatly felt. Choice (D) is the best answer
because purchasing fruit does not make up a significant percentage of a
person’s income or budget as compared with buying and maintaining a
boat.
287. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer because a school can hire
teaching assistants very easily in the short run. Long-run adjustments are
major and significant changes to a firm, such as plant size and investing in
human capital.
288. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A monopoly can earn an economic
profit in the long term because other firms cannot enter the market. In
monopolistic competition, firms can easily enter the market so profit will be
normal in the long term.
289. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Since a monopoly is the sole producer
of a product, the firm will charge an increased price as compared with a
perfect competition, where price is established through supply and demand.
Remember, in a monopoly, there is no competition, so firms will always
charge a higher price.
290. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer because a perfect competition is
a market structure where many firms are producing very similar products,
prices are established through supply and demand, and there is freedom to
enter and exit the market.
291. (A) Choice (A) is correct. There are many different types of
smartphones on the market produced by many different firms. Although

they are similar in many ways (i.e., you can make a phone call, send a text,
and surf the Internet), product differentiation offers variety. Remember, if
you see product differentiation, then a monopolistic competition or an
oligopoly is being discussed.
292. (D) Choice (D) is correct. A natural monopoly is a market
structure where it is beneficial for one firm to control the production of a
good or service. For example, natural gas and the water authority work
most efficiently and with the greatest benefit if there is a natural monopoly.
It would be too complicated and at a great cost if competitive markets
began running separate lines to households for gas and water.
293. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because tobacco is a cost of
production for cigarettes. If the price increases for a cost of production, then
firms must increase their price to keep making a profit on producing the
good.
294. (E) The correct choice is (E). All of the other answer choices are
not accurate for monopolistic competition. (B) and (D) would be true for
monopolies.
295. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Remember that a monopolist is the
only producer of a good or service and has no competition. Therefore, the
firm may raise the price higher than marginal costs. All firms will maximize
profit where marginal revenue (MR) equals marginal cost (MC), but a
monopolist will support a higher price than the MC.
296. (B) Choice (B) is correct. An oligopoly and a monopoly have
barriers to entry into the market. A perfect competition and a monopolistic
competition are market structures that have ease of entry into the market.
297. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because allocative efficiency is
achieved if price (P) equals marginal cost (MC). Choice (B) is incorrect
because the government would not allow P to be greater than MC. Choices
(A) and (D) represent allocative inefficiency.

298. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Price discrimination refers to a
systematic pricing system that charges different prices to different groups of
people. However, the firm will still ensure that the maximum price that
these different people are willing to pay is utilized.
299. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Price discrimination allows firms to
receive every dollar available from their customers. If a firm can
successfully identify specific groups of people and ensure that customers do
not resell their product to other consumers, then price discrimination would
be successful. An example would be selling movie tickets in a theater.
There are different prices for shows at different times, and different prices
for different types of customers: adult, child, and senior citizen.
300. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Even though company Z does not own
all the farmland used in the production of tobacco, it owns a significant
majority. It now controls most of the farmland used in the production of
tobacco. This shows that company Z is attempting to establish a monopoly
by controlling one of the factors of production (land). Choice (A) is
incorrect because all businesses wish to increase profits, and it does not
fully answer the question. Choice (B) is incorrect because an oligopoly
refers to a small number of very large firms; this question refers only to
company Z. Choice (C) is incorrect because even though it is correct that
the profit-maximizing point is where MR = MC, it does not relate to the
scenario in the question.
301. (C) Choice (C) is correct. You should be aware of the graphical
representation of profit for all market structures. This graph represents the
profit of a monopolistically competitive firm. The shaded area represents
profit because the price level is more than the average total cost (ATC).
Since the ATC represents the total cost divided by the output, if the price is
higher than this number, then the firm is making a profit.
302. (C) Choice (C) is correct. With no entry or exit barriers, firms
will enter the market under monopolistic competition until all firms are
earning a normal economic profit.

303. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Game theory examines the
relationships between participants in a specific model structure and attempts
to predict their actions. This is useful for studying oligopolies because they
consist of very large firms that are interdependent companies, producing
either a standardized or differentiated product with barriers to entry.
304. (D) Price leadership refers to a firm that is a leader among its
competitors and sets the market price; others will follow along because they
wish to hold on to their market share. Choice (D) is the best answer because
an oligopoly fits this description.
305. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because if something is
implicit, then it is not blatantly seen outright. An opportunity cost is an
excellent example of an implicit cost. Choice (A) is incorrect because it
describes explicit costs. Choice (B) is incorrect because it describes total
variable costs. Choice (D) is incorrect because it describes average variable
costs.
306. (B) Choice (B) is correct. A cartel, which is a form of an
oligopoly, is a market structure where there are a small number of
interdependent firms, producing either a standardized or differentiated
product with barriers to entry. Since these firms work together to establish
prices and control supply and demand, there is always an incentive for a
firm to cheat to earn a greater profit than its competitors.
307. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Deadweight loss refers to the lost net
benefit to society caused by a movement from competitive market
equilibrium. In other words, the people who would purchase the good who
have more marginal benefit than marginal price are not purchasing the
product. For a monopoly, this occurs when price is greater than marginal
cost.
308. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer because P = MR = MC = ATC
represents a perfectly competitive firm.
309. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Price taking refers to firms that
establish their price through the market forces of supply and demand. Since

oligopolies are very large firms and work together to control supply and
demand, they are price setters.
310. (D) The correct choice is (D). As the company is making a profit
in the long run and the barriers to entering the market are high, this must
mean that it is an example of imperfect competition. An atomistic market is
synonymous with perfect competition, so the remaining answer choices are
not accurate.
311. (D) Choice (D) is correct. This graph illustrates the total revenue
curve and also provides information about changes in marginal revenue.
312. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Average total cost (ATC) is the total
cost divided by the output. If the ATC equals price (P), then firms will make
an economic profit of zero.
313. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Market power refers to the ability of a
firm to set prices above the perfectly competitive level. A perfectly
competitive firm does not have market power because prices are determined
through supply and demand. Therefore, a perfect competition is a price
taker. A monopoly market structure fits perfectly with the idea of market
power because as the only producer of the good, it increases prices above
where MR = MC.
314. (B) Choice (B) is correct. When monopolistic competition exists,
firms sell differentiated products. Since these products aren’t complete
replacements for one another, the firms have some market power.
315. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A patent is a grant given by the
government allowing the patent holder the sole right to produce and sell a
product for a set period of time. If a producer is the only producer of a
product, then it is a monopoly.
316. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Economies of scale refers to a decrease
in ATC as quantity increases. Choice (A) is incorrect because it describes
diseconomies of scale. Choice (C) is incorrect because if quantity
decreases, ATC will not necessarily decrease. Choice (D) is incorrect

because it describes the profit-maximizing point and is unrelated to
economies of scale in the short run. Choice (E) is incorrect because it refers
to elasticity.
317. (D) The correct choice is (D). The soda manufacturer set the price
of a soda can at $5 and limited quantity to 200, while the equilibrium price
would be $2. So the soda manufacturer collects an economic profit of $600
by limiting quantity.
318. (B) The correct choice is (B). Choice (C) is the soda
manufacturer’s economic profit.
319. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The shift would indicate that the soda
manufacturer lost its monopoly.
320. (A) This market is an oligopoly. Few manufacturers and long-run
economic profits are the distinguishing features of this market. Product
differentiation could also indicate monopolistic competition and does not
always exist in an oligopoly.
321. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A group of firms in an oligopoly may
form a cartel to set the price for their goods, which is collusion. Because
these firms set the price, they have market power. This is not an example of
a monopoly, because more than one oil company is in the market.
322. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. There are more apple farms so
substitutes for any farm’s apples are more widely available, thus demand
should be more price elastic.
323. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. This market can be described
as a perfect competition. While demand is likely downward sloping for the
market as a whole, there are many peanut farms selling undifferentiated
peanuts so an individual farm’s decisions don’t affect the market price.
Thus, demand for an individual peanut farm is perfectly elastic.
324. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer. To reduce costs, a firm can shut
down production in the short run, lay off workers, or reduce its raw material

purchases. Refinancing corporate bonds would change the firm’s capital
structure, which is considered a long-run decision.
325. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. If a good increases in price, a
complementary good will also increase in price.
326. (D) The correct choice is (D). On the left side of the cost curve,
the toy manufacturer’s average cost decreases as production rises because
fixed cost is applied to a greater production quantity. When the toy
manufacturer’s production quantity increases beyond the trough of the cost
curve, diminishing marginal returns have a larger impact on average cost
than the decrease in fixed cost and average cost rises.
327. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because firms in an oligopoly
consider other firms’ responses to business decisions, while monopolistic
competition includes many small firms whose decisions don’t greatly
impact one another.
328. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The auto manufacturer’s next best
choice is shutting down for an accounting profit of –$40,000. If it produces
tires, its accounting profit is –$10,000. Thus, it earns an economic profit of
$30,000.
329. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The cable companies have an oligopoly
and may be colluding to control the market.
330. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. When there are many sellers
and few buyers, the market is an oligopsony.
331. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The steel manufacturer is a
monopsony.
332. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. Charging different prices to
viewers in different countries is price discrimination.
333. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Firm A would earn a profit of $25 if it
lowered prices and firm B raised prices. Firm B would then lose $5.

334. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If firms A and B both raise prices, each
firm earns a profit of $10.
335. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. In an oligopoly, a firm may use
a payoff matrix to consider other firms’ decisions when setting prices.
336. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. Defecting always results in a
higher payoff than cooperating, so a firm always has an incentive to defect.
Thus, the Nash equilibrium is for both firms to defect.
337. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. An individual oil producer can
increase its profit by increasing quantity supplied because the cartel is
supplying less oil than the market is willing to buy. Thus, the oil producer
has an incentive to defect from the cartel, although the cartel may respond
by ejecting the oil producer for violating the agreement.
338. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. Buying ads has a payoff of $70
or $40, while not buying ads has a payoff of $50 or $30, so the dominant
strategy for Joey’s is buying ads.
339. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Joey’s and Betty’s both earn $40 if they
each buy ads. They would each earn $50 if neither restaurant bought ads.
340. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The auto manufacturer can’t produce
car windows if it produces car doors, so the money it would have earned by
selling car windows is an implicit cost.
341. (E) The correct choice is (E). As this is a small number of
manufacturers that work together to maintain a price that would be higher
than if there were regular market conditions, this is an example of an
oligopoly.
342. (C) The correct choice is (C). A monopoly is characterized by a
downward slope of the demand curve.
343. (A) The correct choice is (A). This is the only accurate answer
and a trait of both monopolies and oligopolies. (B), (C), and (D) are only

correct for monopolies, while (E) is not accurate for either of these market
structures.
344. (C) The correct choice is (C). Because there is a limited number
of producers, the main reason why they would collude is to raise the market
costs.
345. (D) The correct choice is (D). Because a monopolist can simply
set the price, as it is the only producer of that good, that company is a price
setter. On the other hand, in a perfectly competitive market, companies are
price takers, so the price would be $200 for A and $50 for B.
346. (B) The best answer is choice (B). Acquiring a competitor does
not necessarily create a monopoly or an oligopoly, although it is a step in
that direction. A sole proprietorship or a partnership may acquire a direct
competitor.
347. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The question describes the
orange farm industry as a market with perfect competition. Thus, the orange
farms have low pricing power (they are price takers).
348. (B) The market for tax software is an oligopoly. Barriers to entry
are already high, and the tax software companies are already price makers.
Oligopolies typically don’t involve price competition. Buying the other firm
would create a monopoly, and regulators could block the acquisition on
antitrust grounds. When a market is an oligopoly, firms often respond to
competitors’ business decisions, so Choice (B) is the best answer.
349. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. With many stores and unique
products, the clothing market can be described as monopolistic competition,
so clothing stores are likely to spend much of their revenue on ads.
350. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. By granting the water company
a natural monopoly, water can be delivered efficiently without incurring
excess infrastructure costs. Regulators often control pricing policy for firms
with natural monopolies.

351. (C) The correct choice is (C). Because both monopolies and
oligopolies reduce supply and, in the case of oligopolies, work together to
keep the price higher, there are deadweight costs for consumers, making
them examples of ineffective market structures.
352. (D) The correct choice is (D). Heavy advertisement, a significant
number of competitors, and similar (but not identical) products are all traits
of a monopolistic market.
353. (E) The correct choice is (E). By definition, companies are price
setters in both market structures. Because oligopolies tend to collude to set
a higher price, one company’s lowering the price can trigger a price war. On
the other hand, this is not possible in a monopolistic market, as there is only
one firm in the industry.
354. (B) The correct choice is (B). Because there are numerous
companies in the industry, buyers are very responsive to a change in the
price.

Chapter 5
355. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The equilibrium price is $80 and the
average cost is $60, so the firm earns $20 in economic profit for each golf
club. If it sells 100 golf clubs, it earns $2,000.
356. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. Lower consumer interest
would reduce the equilibrium price for golf clubs but wouldn’t increase
production costs. An equipment breakdown would result in higher
production costs but wouldn’t reduce the equilibrium price. Increased
competition over time explains both the increase in manufacturing costs
(raw materials would actually become more expensive because more golf
club manufacturers would demand them) and the fall in equilibrium price
(price competition among golf club companies would result in a lower price
for golf clubs).

357. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Cross-licensing the patents gives both
software companies a way to prevent other firms from entering the market.
358. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Regulators grant a drug company a
monopoly through a patent, but the patent will eventually expire. A natural
monopoly held by a utility is often granted by regulators but doesn’t end
after a fixed period of time.
359. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If the pharmaceutical firm invents a
new drug, it will get a monopoly on the new drug and can keep earning an
economic profit. Once the patent on the existing drug expires, other firms
(generic drug manufacturers) will enter the market, so the pharmaceutical
firm will lose its opportunity to make an economic profit on that drug.
360. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Diseconomies of scale result in lower
production efficiency.
361. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer.
362. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. The other choices would be
caused by an increase in demand for popcorn.
363. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. Manufacturers will minimize
costs by hiring workers where the MFC of labor is the lowest.
364. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. Job training increases worker
productivity, which increases the MRP for labor.
365. (E) Choice (E) is correct. The rancher pays $9 for the eleventh
bag of feed, plus an additional $1 for each of the first 10 bags, so MFC is
$19.
366. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. Consumers don’t demand raw
materials, a manufacturer demands raw materials so it can make finished
goods for consumers.

367. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A shift from D2 to D3 for bread
demand is an increase in demand, increasing demand for wheat because it is
an input for bread.
368. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Demand for wheat is a derived demand,
and demand for wheat is a direct demand because wheat is an input for
bread.
369. (D) Choice (D) is correct. The supply of labor would increase and
the curve would shift to the right.
370. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Remember the determinants of supply.
If there is a new development in technology, it would potentially decrease a
firm’s cost of production and shift the curve to the right.
371. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. MRP is $600, $400, and $200
for the first, second, and third worker, respectively. If the MFC for labor
was $400, the factory would have two workers. If the MFC for labor was
$200, the factory would hire a third worker.
372. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Revenue for four workers is $4 × $100,
or $400. Revenue for five workers is $3 × 150, or $450. So MRP for the
fifth worker is $50 and MRP = MFC at $50.
373. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Revenue would increase from $2 × 100,
or $200, to $1.50 × 200, or $300. Thus, MRP is $100.
374. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. Because the college canceled
its nursing classes, fewer trained nurses will be available for the hospitals to
hire.
375. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A higher onion cost would increase the
cost of production and the food processor’s labor demand curve would shift
to the left.
376. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. If the motorcycle factory can
substitute machinery for labor, then it needs fewer workers if machinery

becomes more efficient.
377. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. If machinery and labor are
complementary resources, more efficient machines will increase the MRP
of labor so the airplane factory will hire more workers.
378. (A) Choice (A) is correct. When demand for a product is elastic,
the firm’s demand for inputs used to produce the product will be elastic as
well.
379. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If substitute inputs are available in the
market, the firm’s demand for inputs will be more elastic.
380. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. When a production input is less
important, the firm’s demand for the input will be more elastic.
381. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. Company B’s MP of labor
declines more rapidly because it doesn’t have unused trucks available, so
company B has more elastic labor demand.
382. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The price elasticity of labor demand is
–15 percent/
45 percent, which is –0.33.
383. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The price elasticity of labor supply is
20 percent/
40 percent, which is 0.5.
384. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If the MFC of labor decreases,
employment increases because firms will demand more labor.
385. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Demand for production inputs is a
derived demand because consumers don’t purchase production inputs
themselves.
386. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Consumers demand hamburgers so this
is an example of direct demand.

387. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The truck manufacturer hires
production workers because consumers demand trucks.
388. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. The factory will cut back on
sugar purchases until MFC = MRP.
389. (B) The correct choice is (B). Adding the ninth employee allows
the suit manufacturer to produce (24 – 20) = 4 more suits, which are worth
$100 each, so marginal revenue product is $400.
390. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Adding the sixth employee increases
output by two refrigerators, which are worth $500 each, so marginal
revenue product is $1,000.
391. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Marginal product is –5, so marginal
revenue product is –5 × $10, or –$50.
392. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The firm must compare
marginal revenue product with marginal factor cost. Even if marginal
revenue product increases, if MFC is greater than MRP the firm will earn
less profit if it increases output. MFC is less than MRP in this example so
the golf club factory should increase production.
393. (A) Choice (A) is correct. MRP is $125 and MR is $2.50, so MP
must be 50.
394. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. Because of derived demand,
demand for wood will increase and the price of wood will rise.
395. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Human capital refers to the skills a
worker applies on the job. Acquiring human capital increases a worker’s
value in the marketplace. Human capital is a major factor of production,
and any increase in human capital through educational training would
increase the productivity of labor.
396. (B) The correct choice is (B). Marginal revenue product of labor
is calculated by multiplying marginal revenue and marginal cost. This is

shown in the table and is 7 × 8, which equals $56.
397. (E) The correct choice is (E). If marginal revenue is three times
higher than marginal cost, then it is 5 × 3, which equals $15. The marginal
revenue product of labor can then be calculated by multiplying marginal
product, which is 6, with 15, and this equals $90.
398. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Choice (B) is marginal revenue
product.
399. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer because of derived demand.
400. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because tomatoes are an input
for ketchup.
401. (D) Choice (D) is correct. MRP now equals MFC at $150, instead
of $130, so the hot dog truck will lay off its third and fourth workers.
402. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Labor costs would increase by ($5,000
× 7) + $30,000, or $65,000.
403. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The price of a factor of production
increased, so the price of another unit of output increases as well.
404. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer, because MFC < MRP and the
MFC for another employee is less than the MFC for machinery.
405. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because wheat is a factor of
production for producing bagels. If the price of a factor of production
decreases, Seth can increase production and his demand for labor will
increase.
406. (B) Choice (B) is the correct answer because derived demand
refers to the demand for resources from the demand for the goods produced
by the resources. Choice (A) is incorrect because it refers to the demand for
labor. Choice (C) is incorrect because it illustrates the least-cost rule.
Choice (D) is incorrect because that is the profit-maximizing point for

resource employment. Choice (E) is incorrect because it refers to a
monopsony.
407. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Wages are part of MFC so
manufacturers will hire workers where MFC is lower and lay off workers
where MFC is higher.
408. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. MRP for labor will increase in
New York because of the free education, while it will fall in Nebraska
because fewer students can afford university education.
409. (A) Derived demand refers to the demand for resources that come
from the demand for the goods produced by the resource. People have a
demand not for the worker but for the product the worker produces. Choice
(A) is the best answer because the demand for tractors and workers is
derived from people’s demand for food.
410. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because many people go to the
doctor when they catch a cold. If a cure is found for the common cold,
people will have fewer doctor visits and would decrease the demand for
doctors in the long run. Every other choice would increase the demand for
doctors.
411. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The output effect states that there will
be a rise in output if the price of a resource used in the production of a
product decreases, and firms will increase production and the demand for
labor will increase.
412. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Remember that the MRP curve and the
labor demand curve are similar in that they are both downward sloping. If
MRP increases, so will labor demand.
413. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Choice (A) is incorrect because it refers
to the marginal revenue cost. Choice (C) is incorrect because it refers to the
least-cost rule. Choice (D) is incorrect because it refers to profit
maximizing. Choice (E) is incorrect because it refers to a monopsony. The

marginal revenue product of labor (MRP) refers to the change in a firm’s
total revenue from hiring one additional unit of labor.
414. (D) Choice (D) is correct. The firm should lay off workers until
MRP of labor equals the wage of the last worker hired.
415. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Immigration will affect a labor supply
curve because if it decreases, it will shift that country’s labor supply curve
to the left. The labor supply curve will shift to the right for the country the
labor supply enters.
416. (C) Choice (C) is correct. If the price of raw materials increases,
MFC will increase. The firm will have to lay off workers until MRP equals
the MFC of labor again.
417. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Remember that complements are
products that are used with another product. For example, you cannot play
tennis without a racket and tennis balls. If the price of a good increases, so
will the price of its complements. This will result in a decrease in labor
because firms will lay off workers until MRP = W.
418. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because the least-cost rule seeks
to find the best combination between resources and capital that would be
the cheapest for the firm. Choice (A) is incorrect because it refers to a
monopsony and the answer does not fully answer the question. Choice (B)
is incorrect because it refers to profit maximizing. Choice (D) is incorrect
because it refers to marginal revenue cost. Choice (E) is incorrect because it
refers to the marginal revenue product.
419. (B) Choice (B) is correct. Wages are a major cost to firms. If the
price of labor increases, then firms will lay off workers to the point where
MRP = MFC.
420. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. Because diners want to eat food
at the restaurant (demand), the restaurant will demand cooking ingredients
(inputs used to make food).

421. (D) The correct choice is (D). With one more unit of input (the
sixth worker) production increases by five auto parts, so MP = 5. The auto
parts are worth $3, so MR is $3. MR × MP is $3 × 5, or $15.
422. (D) Choice (D) is correct. For the tenth employee, production
increases by three ice cream cones (27 – 24 = 3) so MP = 3. The ice cream
cones sell for $2, so MR is $2. MR × MP is $2 × 3, or $6.
423. (D) Choice (D) is correct. If the fishing boat hires a seventh crew
member, it brings back five fewer fish. As a result, MP = –5 for the seventh
crew member. MR is $4, so MR × MP is $4 × –5, or –$20. The boat has
limited space available, so if it hires too many crew members they will get
in each other’s way and productivity will drop.
424. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. If the hot dog stand hired a
fifth worker, marginal factor cost would increase by $120, while marginal
revenue product would increase by 20 × $5 = $100. Thus, MFC is greater
than MRP and the hot dog stand shouldn’t hire the fifth worker.
425. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. If graphite is used to make golf
clubs and demand for golf clubs increases, golf club manufacturers will
demand more graphite and the demand curve for graphite will shift to the
right. As a result, the price of graphite will increase.
426. (D) Choice (D) is correct. MRP is $150 and MR is $3, so MP
must be 50.
427. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The surfboard manufacturer’s decision
to hire a seventh worker increases total revenue by $100, so MRP is $100.
MP increased by 2, so MR is $100 divided by 2, or $50.
428. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. Again, if perfect competition
exists, labor and raw materials costs will remain constant as output
increases because firms aren’t large enough for their production decisions to
affect supply. If the market is a monopsony or an oligopsony, a firm will
incur higher labor and raw materials costs if it increases output.

429. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. All of the other choices would
result in higher demand for cars.
430. (A) Choice (A) is correct. The demand for corn increased because
corn is an input for corn tortillas and demand for corn tortillas increased.
431. (C) Choice (C) is correct. MFC = $120 and the hot dog stand
should hire workers until MRP = MFC.
432. (B) Choice (B) is correct. MFC increased so the equilibrium point
where MRP = MFC has moved from $85 to $90.
433. (C) Choice (C) is correct. The skateboard manufacturer is a
monopsony. If the firm hired another worker, it would have to pay $50,000
plus $10,000 × 10 in additional labor costs. Thus, MFC is $150,000 and
MRP is $60,000, so hiring another employee would reduce profit.
434. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Adding another employee increases
labor costs by $40,000 + ($10,000 × 6), or $100,000, so MFC is $100,000.
435. (E) Choice (E) is correct. The firm pays $250 plus (10 × $50) to
buy another ton of sugar, so MFC is $750.
436. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If the price of a factor of production
decreases, the marginal cost of another unit of output decreases as well.
437. (A) Choice (A) is correct. An oligopsony will have lower wages
because firms will not hire as many workers as they would with perfect
competition.
438. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Consumers don’t demand aluminum;
they demand bicycles, so the bicycle manufacturer buys aluminum to
satisfy bicycle demand.
439. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Frosting demand will shift to the right
because of derived demand, increasing the frosting price and quantity.

Chapter 6
440. (D) The correct choice is (D). The company could pay a tax of 1.5
percent, as this is equal to $15,000. This would be the most precise amount
to equalize the harm the company does to society through carbon dioxide
emissions, compared with the benefits that the local community could do
with $15,000 in taxes.
441. (E) The correct choice is (E). Antitrust laws are used when the
government is afraid that a potential merger or acquisition could lead to a
company having a too significant share of the market.
442. (E) Choice (E) is correct. If a good is produced that not all people
enjoy the benefit of, it is known as a private good. A private good is a good
that can rival other goods and is excludable to other consumers. For
example, if a person does not have the money to pay for a taxi, then he or
she is forced to find another mode of transportation.
443. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If a positive externality is produced, a
person who does not consume or work on the product benefits from it
nonetheless. This is known as a marginal external benefit (MEB). The
demand curve would not reflect MEB, unless the government intervened
and internalized it.
444. (C) Choice (C) is correct. Taxes such as a progressive tax help
with the redistribution of wealth.
445. (B) A negative externality refers to costs in the production of
goods and services that are put upon a third party. For example, pollution is
an example of a negative externality. Therefore, any answer that describes a
benefit to society should be eliminated. Choice (B) is the best answer.
Choice (A) is incorrect because it describes egalitarianism.
446. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A free rider is a person who benefits
from goods and services without incurring any of the costs. The goal of a

private firm is to earn a profit; if free riders are enjoying the benefits of a
good or service, then firms do not produce.
447. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A positive externality refers to the
benefits experienced by a third party outside the production of a good or
service. Therefore, any choice that describes a cost to society should be
eliminated. Choice (A) is incorrect because it describes egalitarianism.
448. (A) Choice (A) is correct. If society would benefit when the good
has a higher price and a lower quantity produced, then a negative
externality exists.
449. (B) The correct choice is (B). This is the only example of a
negative externality of production. Both (A) and (C) are positive
externalities of production.
450. (B) The correct choice is (B). Samantha is paying more taxes as
her earnings go up, so it is clear that this is an example of a progressive tax
system, (in which taxes increase with earnings). When Samantha earned
only $25,000, her tax rate was 10 percent, but it was 50 percent when she
earned $72,000.
451. (B) The correct choice is (B). By providing a company with the
subsidy, it is more likely that the company will produce at the level that will
meet the demand for the vaccine.
452. (C) The correct choice is (C). By taking a look at Tim’s previous
taxes, it is clear that his country has a flat tax rat which is equal to 10
percent. Ten percent of Tim’s earnings in 2020 is equal to $13,500.
453. (B) Choice (B) is correct because since the government
intervened and shifted the supply curve to the left, production will decrease
and the negative externality of overproduction will be corrected.
454. (D) Choice (D) is correct. A free rider is a person who benefits
from goods and services without incurring any of the costs. The goal of a

private firm is to earn a profit; if free riders are enjoying the benefits of a
good or service, then firms do not produce.
455. (D) The correct choice is (D). The Gini coefficient can only be
between 0 and 1. The closer the value is to 0, the lower the level of
inequality. In the case of this table, Slovenia has a Gini coefficient of
roughly 0.2, which would indicate that there are no significant issues
concerning inequality.
456. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A tax is regressive if the proportion of
income paid in taxes decreases as income increases. A sales tax is an
example of this because people with low incomes pay a higher portion of
their money on sales tax compared with people with high incomes.
457. (A) Choice (A) is correct. Compensating differential refers to the
measurement between the unpleasantness of a job and wage. For example, a
firefighter is doing a more dangerous job than a telemarketer. It does not
place the value of one job over the other; it only means that these jobs are
different. Although college professors may be more esteemed in the
workforce because of their level of education, many plumbers earn more
money. The key difference is the nonmonetary differences of a job.
458. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer because the fighter jet is
purchased by the government, not an individual consumer, and all domestic
consumers receive its national defense benefits.
459. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A proportional tax is a tax that is paid
from someone’s income regardless of income level and is also known as a
flat tax.
460. (D) The correct choice is (D). Regardless of income, Bill has
always paid a 20 percent tax rate. On the other hand, Caroline paid a lower
tax rate as her income increased, meaning that this is an example of a
regressive tax rate.
461. (C) Choice (C) is correct. A proportional tax is a tax where the
same proportion of income is paid in taxes regardless of income level. Anna

received a raise in salary, but she still paid 20 percent of her income in
taxes.
462. (D) A public good is a good that is nonexcludable. Choice (D) is
the best choice because firefighters must respond to help, regardless if the
person paid his or her taxes.
463. (A) A Gini ratio is a measure of income inequality. If the Gini
ratio is closer to zero, income distribution is more equal. If the Gini ratio is
closer to 1, income distribution is more unequal. Choice (A) is the best
answer because this illustrates the definition of a Gini ratio.
464. (E) Choice (E) is correct. The diagram is called a Lorenz curve: a
graph that illustrates how a nation’s income is distributed throughout a
nation’s households.
465. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer because a Gini ratio of 0.9 is
very close to 1; therefore, it shows a highly unequal distribution of income.
466. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer because this scenario represents
a regressive tax. A regressive tax is a tax where the proportion of income
paid in taxes decreases as income rises. There is a big difference in Anna
and Sarah’s salaries, yet Sarah pays only $2,000 more in taxes than Anna
does.
467. (D) The correct choice is (D). Public goods, such as official
government statistics, are non-excludable. This means that everyone has
access to them.
468. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A regressive tax is a tax where the
proportion of income paid in taxes decreases as income rises. Choice (B) is
incorrect because a proportional tax is one that is paid from someone’s
income regardless of income level. Choice (C) is incorrect because a flat tax
is the same as a proportional tax. Choice (D) is incorrect because a
progressive tax is one where the proportion of income paid in taxes
increases as income increases. Choice (E) is incorrect because a tax bracket

is based on a person’s income level: as your income increases, you might
fall into a tax bracket that pays higher taxes.
469. (A) Choice (A) is correct. A progressive tax is one in which the
proportion of income paid in taxes increases as income increases.
470. (B) Choice (B) is correct. A private good is a good that can rival
other goods and is excludable to other consumers. If a person does not have
the money to pay for a taxicab ride, then he or she is forced to find another
mode of transportation.
471. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Since the world benefited from this
satellite transmission, the satellite is a public good. A public good is a good
that is nonexcludable.
472. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer because taxes (such as a
progressive tax) help with the redistribution of wealth. Choice (A) is
incorrect because other economic systems help in the redistribution of
wealth, such as a mixed economic system. Choice (D) is incorrect because
it does not differentiate income levels on the percentage of tax paid.
473. (A) The correct choice is (A). These taxes are used when there is
a need to tax a market that has some type of negative externality. An
example would be taxing an oil manufacturing company for excessive
carbon dioxide emissions.
474. (E) The correct choice is (E). By doing so, the government would
effectively be encouraging companies to use more solar panels rather than
nonrenewable sources of energy.
475. (B) The correct choice is (B). As the fact that the company has
produced this product will provide benefit to other elements of society, this
is an example of a positive externality of production.
476. (D) The correct choice is (D). Efficiency-enhancing taxes are
used to prevent a specific negative externality, and the example in (D) is a
tariff caused by regular market conditions.

477. (D) Choice (D) is correct. The shopkeeper’s income rose and the
total tax remained the same, so the pension tax is a regressive tax.
478. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The marginal cost of air
pollution to society is $10 per barrel, so charging gas stations a tax of $10
per barrel would make the marginal social cost of fuel equal the marginal
social benefit of fuel.
479. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. A Pigovian subsidy paid to bus
companies will increase the supply of buses, shifting the bus supply curve
to the right.
480. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. A Pigovian subsidy paid to
consumers will shift demand for the subsidized good to the right.
481. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. A police car provides law
enforcement for all citizens without charging additional fees, and the
service is non-rival because police normally have enough cars to enforce
the law for all citizens.
482. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. The Gini ratio fell, so the
income distribution in country X became more equal.
483. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The Gini ratio increased, so the
income distribution in country Y became less equal.
484. (D) Choice (D) is correct. Country B has a lower Gini ratio than
country C so it has a more equal income distribution.
485. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The progressive tax will result in a
more equal income distribution, and a lower Gini ratio, for country E.
486. (B) Choice (B) is correct. The regressive tax will result in a less
equal income distribution, and a higher Gini ratio, for city C.
487. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. While the birds are a
nonexcludable resource, there is a limited supply of birds, so they are a rival

good as well. Thus, they are a common resource and not a public good.
488. (C) Choice (C) is the best answer. If the bridge has sufficient
capacity, it is a nonrival good. The bridge does have a toll, so it is an
excludable resource. Thus, the bridge is a quasi-public good.
489. (D) Choice (D) is correct. When there is little traffic, the freeway
is a public good because it is nonexcludable and non-rival. During rush
hour, the freeway becomes a rival good (while remaining nonexcludable) so
it becomes a common resource. High utilization can also change a quasipublic good into a private good temporarily.
490. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. Consumers can reach an
agreement on negative externalities without government intervention when
negotiating costs are low. Reaching an agreement requires MC = MB.
491. (A) Choice (A) is the best answer. The pollution affects many
people in the city, which complicates the negotiation process and makes the
factory’s liabilities unclear. It would be more effective for government
regulators to set a price on the pollution caused by the factory.
492. (B) Choice (B) is correct. If society would benefit if production
increased and the price fell, a positive externality exists.
493. (E) Choice (E) is the best answer. Subsidized student loans are a
consumer subsidy. If grants are available to all students, university
education is nonexcludable (since anyone can get a grant) and rival (since
universities can admit a limited number of students) so it is also a common
resource.
494. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. A property tax exemption
would benefit universities directly, subsidizing the producer. If many
students still can’t afford tuition, university education is excludable, as well
as rival because universities can admit a limited number of students.
495. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The government used resources
to educate its citizens, and businesses received the spillover benefit of a

more productive workforce. Choice (E) is not correct, because an
alternative to publicly funded education is firms providing education and
charging tuition fees.
496. (D) Choice (D) is the best answer. Demand for public goods is
considered a phantom demand. An individual does not decide to purchase
one unit of a public good by considering the marginal benefits and costs of
buying one more unit.
497. (B) Choice (B) is the best answer. The demand curve for a public
good is the vertical sum of each consumer’s demand curve.
498. (D) Choice (D) is correct. This graph shows demand curves for a
public good.
499. (D) Choice (D) is correct. The vertical sum of MB1, MB2, and
MB3 (MB SUM) = MC at the equilibrium price of the public good.
500. (B) Choice (B) is correct. For a public good, the sum of
consumers’ demand curves will decline more sharply than the demand
curve for an individual consumer.

